Annual Report 2025
Litigation

1

Glossary
CSA		 Concerned Supervisory Authority
DPA

Data Protection Authority

DPC		 Data Protection Commission
DPO

Data Protection Officer

EDPB European Data Protection Board
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
IMI		 Internal Market Information System
LED		 Law Enforcement Directive
LSA		 Lead Supervisory Authority
OSS		 One Stop Shop
SMC		 Senior Management Committee
AI

2

Artificial Intelligence

Litigation

Contents
Foreword

2

Timeline of 2025

4

Executive Summary

6

Mission, Vision and Values of the DPC

10

1.

Roles and Responsibilities

12

2.

DPC Senior Team

15

3.

Cases and Complaints

18

4.

Data Breaches

34

5.

Decisions and Inquiries

38

6.

Litigation

58

7.

Supervision

70

8.

Children’s Data Protection Rights

90

9.

Data Protection Officers

95

10. International Activities

98

11. 	Human Resources, Communications
and Corporate Governance 				

111

Appendix 1: Report on Protected Disclosures received by the
Data Protection Commission in 2025 			

124

Appendix 2: Energy Report 2025

128

Appendix 3: Statement of Internal Controls

131

Index

133

Foreword
2025 saw an unprecedented 45% increase in
complaints received by the Data Protection
Commission (DPC), many of which involved
the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) by persons
making complaints, adding to the volume and
complexity of the documentation presented.
At the same time, the scale and complexity of
the use of personal data by rapidly advancing
AI technologies increased significantly, with
heightened risks and harms for individuals. The
DPC also experienced a rise in litigation cases
during the year taken by companies on foot
of cross-border inquiries being initiated and
concluded into their data processing activities.
Against this backdrop, a hotly debated topic
throughout 2025 was the balance between
technological innovation and ensuring rigorous
protections for our personal data. A pervasive
question was whether digital regulation was
stifling innovation. The European Commission
proposed a series of legislative simplification
measures across various regimes including the
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) while
maintaining a consensus view that changes
should not be to the detriment to European
values including the fundamental right to
protection of our personal data as set out in
both the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and
the GDPR. In the performance of its functions,
the DPC sought to uphold the view that
innovation and regulation can and must
co-exist in a mutually conducive balance,
ensuring the right to data protection while
facilitating responsible innovation.

2

Foreword

During the year the DPC continued to discharge
its mandate under the GDPR. Following the
harmonised Europe-wide December 2024
European Data Protection Board opinion on
Artificial Intelligence, during 2025 the DPC
continued to regulate under the GDPR the
training of generative AI models by the large
technology firms based in Ireland. This work
included close cooperation with the DPC’s peer
European authorities, in particular in its role
as the EU Lead Supervisory Authority for the
companies concerned.
In April, the DPC concluded its Inquiry into
transfers of European User Data by TikTok
Technology Limited to China following consensus
from its peer EU regulators under the ‘One Stop
Shop’ regulatory mechanism of the GDPR where
the DPC acts as Lead Supervisory Authority.
In May, the Taoiseach and the Minister for Justice
opened the new DPC offices on Pembroke Row,
in Dublin. With the assistance of the OPW, the
new building allowed the DPC to finally house
its Dublin-based staff in one centralised modern
building. In the same month, the DPC concluded
its Inquiry into the use of facial matching
technology in the Public Services Card.

During the year the DPC worked with its
peer authorities in Europe and agreed the
Helsinki Statement in July on how European
data protection authorities planned to assist
individuals and organisations to remain data
protection-compliant through simpler guidance
and increased engagement.
The DPC increased its cooperation with other
digital regulators through the Digital Regulators
Group, increased initiatives on advancing
the safety of children and the protection of
their personal data online and engaged with
its European and international colleagues on
multiple issues of common concern including on
child safety and assurance initiatives.
In November, the DPC launched its public
awareness Sharenting Campaign which was one
of the most watched videos in Ireland in the
past five years. The viral #PauseBeforeYouPost
‘Sharenting’ video was viewed world-wide and
drew attention to the need to take care when
sharing children’s personal data on-line. The DPC
deepened its engagement with bodies working on
adult safeguarding, produced additional toolkits
for schools and established a dedicated group
comprising 20 national governing sporting bodies
and local partnerships. It also deepened its work
with the Irish retail sector.

In October, Niamh Sweeney was appointed
as a Commissioner for Data Protection, thus
completing the move from a one to three-person
Commission.
The work of the DPC during 2025 could not have
been achieved without the untiring commitment
of the DPC’s staff which increased to 295 by year
end. As Commissioners we wish to acknowledge
our staff who drive the DPC’s mission. We also
wish to acknowledge our stakeholders including
the thousands of data protection officers who
with us strive to ensure that the data protection
rights of all persons are protected whether by
government, private or voluntary organisations.

Dr. Des Hogan
Chairperson,
Commissioner for Data Protection

Foreword

3

Timeline of 2025

Q1

Q2

Data Protection Commission (DPC) signs joint
declaration on AI alongside data protection
authorities from Australia, Korea, France, and
the United Kingdom.

European Data Protection Board (EDPB)
statement on age assurance, co-drafted
by the DPC, is published.

DPC announces Inquiry into X Internet Unlimited
Company (XIUC) on the processing of personal data
of EU/European Economic Area (EEA) users for the
purposes of generative AI model training.

DPC fines TikTok Technology Limited €530 million
and orders corrective measures following Inquiry into
transfers of EEA user data to China.

Taoiseach Micheál Martin and Minister
for Justice Jim O’Callaghan open new
DPC office on Pembroke Row, Dublin.

From left to right: Commissioner Dale
Sunderland, Minister for Justice Jim
O’Callaghan, Taoiseach Micheál Martin
and Commissioner Des Hogan opening
the new DPC premises on Pembroke
Row in Dublin, May 2025.

4

DPC concludes investigation and issues
Final Decision into facial matching technology
regarding the Department of Social Protection’s
Public Services Card.

Final Decision published following an Inquiry
into a personal data breach at the City of Dublin
Education and Training Board.

Q3

DPC announces Inquiry into transfers of personal
data to China following TikTok Technology Limited’s
discovery of an issue in February 2025 that resulted
in some EEA user personal data being stored on
servers located in China.

Launch of Adult Safeguarding Toolkit
to protect vulnerable adults.

DPC announces Inquiry into Children’s
Health Ireland at Tallaght University Hospital.

DPC is shortlisted for award under the enforcement
category at the 2025 Global Privacy Assembly in
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Q4

DPC, as part of the Digital Regulators’ Group,
launches the Short Guide to Digital Regulation.

DPC and Coimisiún na Meán sign Cooperation
Agreement and issue a joint statement on Advancing
the safety of children and the protection of their
personal data online.

Niamh Sweeney appointed as a third
Commissioner for Data Protection.

DPC launches #Pausebeforeyoupost ad
campaign about ‘Sharenting’ which generates
over 150 million views globally.
From left to right: Commissioner Dale
Sunderland, Commissioner Des Hogan and
Commissioner Niamh Sweeney.

Deirdre O’Donovan is appointed
as the DPC’s Director of Legal.

DPC hosts the Kick Start Compliance
conference in Croke Park, focusing on
data protection in sport.

DPC issues Final Decision following
an Inquiry into University of Limerick.
5

Executive Summary
Key Numbers: January 1 – December 31, 2025

New cases1 received

16,160

Cases concluded

11,734

representing a 45% increase
from 2024 (11,091).

representing a 12% increase 
from 2024 (10,510).

Cases concluded
through
complaint-handling

Electronic direct 
marketing investigations
concluded

Cross-Border 
complaints 
concluded

representing a 9% increase
from 2024 (2,357).

representing a 88% increase
from 2024 (146).

representing a 43% increase
from 2024 (145).

Breach notifications
received

Calls received

2,569

275

6,521

Half of all notifications 
arose as a result of 
correspondence being sent
to the wrong recipient.

1

6

208

6,654

Cases are defined as contacts that require further engagement beyond the initial query. Cases in this instance
can therefore include complaints from individuals, but also encompasses requests for advice and guidance which
do not include a complaint element. This figure does not include contacts from the media, speaking invitations,
breach notifications or consultation requests.

Executive Summary

Large-Scale 
Inquiries concluded

4

Final
Decisions

10

The largest fine was a €530 million
penalty against TikTok Technology
Limited regarding the transfer of the
personal data of EU/EEA users to China.
Since May 2018, the DPC has issued
€4.04 billion in fines.

92

163

Administrative fines imposed

€530,773,000

Provisional
Decisions

Notifications of
amicable resolutions 
were achieved through the GDPR
Article 60 cooperation mechanism,
representing a 41% increase from
2024 (115).

New Inquiries
In 2025 the DPC announced the commencement
of new inquiries into:
•

the physical safety and security of children’s
health records at Children’s Health Ireland
at Tallaght University Hospital;

•

transfers of EU/EEA personal data by TikTok
Technology Limited to China; and

•

use of EU/EEA user data for AI model training
by XIUC.

Executive Summary

7

Received

Participated in over

Article 61 GDPR Mutual
Assistance Requests from 
other European regulators.

European Data Protection
Board (EDPB) meetings.

1,015

140

DPC was
represented on

13

EDPB subgroups.

Binding Corporate Rules

The DPC provided input 
and observations on over

The DPC was the lead reviewing supervisory
authority (SA) in relation to 13 Binding
Corporate Rules (BCR) applications from
eight different companies, and acted
as co-reviewer for other SAs on nine BCR
applications from six different companies.

77

pieces of proposed 
national legislation.

Pause Before
You Post
Campaign
The DPC launched a national public
awareness campaign called Pause Before
You Post which highlighted the risks
associated with ‘sharenting’ – i.e. the
habitual sharing of children’s personal
information, photos, and videos online
by parents.
Since its publication, the campaign
has reached a wide audience.
Pause Before You
Post

8

Executive Summary

The campaign generated over

150 million
views globally.

45 million
views across the 
DPC’s social channels.

New Guidance
Several new pieces of guidance were also published
by the DPC in 2025, including:
An Adult Safeguarding Toolkit to support
organisations dealing with the personal
data of vulnerable adults.
A Short Guide to Digital Regulation which
was created in collaboration with the
other members of the Digital Regulators’
Group – Coimisiún na Meán, ComReg and
the Competition and Consumer Protection
Commission – to clarify common queries in
the digital regulation space in Ireland.
An online resource for schools which
supports them in taking a proportionate
and compliant approach to personal
data processing.

Staff of the DPC
presented at over

100

speaking events in 
2025, both nationally
and internationally.

A series of infographics focusing on
data protection in sport.
Sharenting – Top Tips – an online resource
offering practical tips to limit the risks
posed when parents share or post data
about their children’s lives online.
The DPC’s handling of Subject Access
Requests – guidance for data controllers
as to how to appropriately respond to a
Subject Access Request made under Article
15 of the GDPR.

9

Mission, Vision and
Values of the DPC
Mission
The DPC’s mission is to uphold the consistent application of data
protection law through engagement, supervision and enforcement,
and driving compliance with data protection legislation. The DPC
safeguards the data protection rights of individuals and provides
clarity for the organisations it regulates by:
•

educating stakeholders on their rights and responsibilities;

•

taking a fair and balanced approach to complaint handling;

•

communicating extensively and transparently with stakeholders;

•

participating actively at European Data Protection Board level to
achieve consistency;

•

cultivating technological foresight, in anticipation of future
regulatory developments;

•

sanctioning proportionately and judiciously; and

•

retaining and developing the expert capacities of its staff to
ensure operational effectiveness.

10

Vision and Values
The DPC is committed to being an independent,
fair and consistent regulator of EU data
protection law; regulating with clear purpose,
trusted by the public, respected by our peers
and effective in our regulation. The DPC applies
a risk-based regulatory approach to its work, so
that its resources are prioritised on the basis of
delivering the greatest benefit to the maximum
number of people. The DPC is a rewarding
and challenging place to work, with a focus on
retaining, attracting and allocating the most
appropriate people to deliver on its mandate,
recognising the value and capacities of its staff
as its most critical asset.
In the conduct of its duties, the DPC is committed
to act always in a way that is:

Fair
Expert
Consistent
Transparent

The DPC’s internal values focus on promoting a
work culture of trust and respect, where staff feel
valued, informed, and confident that decisions are
fair and transparent, with strengths encouraged
and areas for development supported. The goal
is to ensure empathy and understanding among
colleagues with opportunities for learning,
growth, and advancement accessible to all,
fostering equality, diversity and inclusion.
Building a workplace that prioritises fairness,
friendliness, and collaboration, where innovation
is welcomed and supported all form part of the
DPC’s internal culture.

Regulatory Strategy
The DPC’s Regulatory Strategy for 2022-2027
sets out how the DPC delivers on its mandate to
uphold the fundamental right to data protection.
The Strategy, and the work that flows from it, has
been based around five interconnected pillars of
equal priority.
1. Regulate consistently and effectively
2. Safeguard individuals and promote data
protection awareness
3. Prioritise the protection of children and other
vulnerable groups
4. Bring clarity to stakeholders

Accountable
Forward Looking

5. Support organisations and drive compliance
The Strategy is arranged according to
fundamental goals, underpinned by the DPC’s
mission, vision and values, which collectively
contribute to the delivery of its strategic priorities.

Engaged
Independent

Results-driven

Mission, Vision and Values at the DPC

11

1.

Roles and
Responsibilities

1. Roles and Responsibilities
Functions of the DPC
The right to the protection of personal data is set out in EU law in the
EU Treaties and in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. The DPC is the
national independent authority in Ireland responsible for upholding this
fundamental right. The DPC is tasked with monitoring the application
of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Regulation (EU)
2016/679). The DPC also has functions relating to other regulatory
frameworks, including the Irish ePrivacy Regulations (2011) and the EU
Directive known as the Law Enforcement Directive (LED). The statutory
functions of the DPC are as established under the Data Protection Act
2018, which gives further effect to the GDPR and to the LED.
The core functions of the DPC, under the GDPR
and the Data Protection Act 2018 include:
•

driving improved compliance with data
protection legislation by controllers and
processors;

•

handling complaints from individuals in
relation to potential infringements of their
data protection rights;

•

conducting inquiries and investigations into
potential infringements of data protection
legislation;

•

promoting awareness among organisations
and the public of the risks, rules, safeguards
and rights incumbent in the processing of
personal data;

•

co-operating with data protection authorities
in other EU Member States on mutual issues,
involving cross-border processing of personal
data; and

•

acting as EU Lead Supervisory Authority for
data controllers with their main establishment
in Ireland.

The ePrivacy Regulations concern the
processing of personal data in the context of
electronic communications such as electronic
direct marketing.
The Law Enforcement Directive (LED) applies
to the processing of personal data by bodies
with law-enforcement functions in the context
of the prevention, investigation, detection or
prosecution of criminal offences or execution of
criminal penalties.
In addition to its functions under the GPDR, the
DPC continues to perform its regulatory functions
under the Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003,
in respect of any complaints that relate to the
period before 25 May 2018 (when the GDPR came
into force), as well as in relation to certain limited
other categories of processing, irrespective of
whether that processing occurred before or after
25 May 2018.

Roles and Responsibilities

13

Funding and
Administration—Vote 43
(Previously Vote 44)
The DPC is funded by the Exchequer and does
not derive monetary gain from fines imposed.
On confirmation by the Courts, administrative
fines imposed by the DPC are remitted to the
central exchequer. The Chairperson of the
Commission is the Accounting Officer for the
Commission’s Vote, Vote 43.
The DPC’s 2025 funding was €29.12 million,
of which €19.357 million was allocated for pay
related expenditure, and €9.763 million was
allocated to non-pay expenditure.
The funding for 2025 represented an increase of
approximately €1 million on the 2024 allocation.

14

Roles and Responsibilities

2.
DPC Senior Team

The DPC Senior Management Team from left to right: David Murphy, Cathal Ryan, Diarmuid Goulding, Jennifer Dolan, MB
Donnelly, Deirdre O’Donovan,  Niall Cavanagh, Dale Sunderland, Dr. Des Hogan, Ian Chambers, Gráinne Duffy, Labhras Sammin,
Sandra Skehan and Cian O’Brien. Not in photograph: Andrew Carroll, Graham Doyle, Elizabeth Finn, Gráinne Hawkes, Sarah Lea,
Ultan O’Carroll, and Niamh Sweeney.

2. DPC Senior Team
The DPC’s Senior Management Committee (SMC) comprises
the Commissioners for Data Protection, Directors and
Principal Officers.
The Commissioners and members of the SMC oversee the
proper management and governance of the organisation, in
line with the principles set out in the Corporate Governance
Standard for the Civil Service (2015).
The SMC has a formal schedule of matters for consideration
and decision, as appropriate, to ensure effective oversight
and control of the organisation.

16

DPC Senior Team

During 2025, the SMC comprised:
Dr Des Hogan
Chairperson, Commissioner
for Data Protection;
Dale Sunderland
Commissioner for Data Protection;
Niamh Sweeney
Commissioner for Data Protection
(from Q3 2025);
Cian O’Brien
Director and Deputy Commissioner with
responsibility for Large-Scale Inquiries including
Investigations & Cross-Border Complaints;
Deirdre O’Donovan
Director and Deputy Commissioner,
with responsibility for Legal (from Q3 2025);
Andrew Carroll
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Large-Scale
Inquiries & Investigations Team 2;
Niall Cavanagh
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Large-Scale
Inquiries & Investigations Team 1;
Ian Chambers
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Frontline,
Breaches, Complaints and Information;
Jennifer Dolan
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Inter Regulatory
Affairs & ePrivacy Prosecutions;
MB Donnelly
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Strategy,
Finance, Governance and Risk;
Graham Doyle
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Corporate
Affairs, Media & Communications;

Gráinne Duffy
Deputy Commissioner, Head of People
and Learning;
Elizabeth Finn
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Cross-Border
Complaints & Inquiries;
Diarmuid Goulding
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Large-Scale
Inquiries & Investigations Team 3;
Gráinne Hawkes
Deputy Commissioner, Head of EDPB/
International Affairs & AI Act;
Sarah Lea
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Legal Affairs
(from Q2 2025);
David Murphy
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Consultation
& Supervision Team 1;
Ultan O’Carroll
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Regulatory
Technology Affairs;
Fleur O’Shea
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Legal Affairs
(until Q2 2025);
Cathal Ryan
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Consultation
& Supervision Team 2;
Labhras Sammin
Deputy Commissioner, Head of Enterprise
& ICT Operations; and
Sandra Skehan
Deputy Commissioner, Head of National
Complaint Handling & Inquiries including
Access Requests, LED, Breach & Processing.

DPC Senior Team

17

3.

Cases and Complaints

3. Cases and Complaints
In 2025, the DPC experienced its busiest year to date, with the DPC
receiving 16,160 new cases2. This represents a 45% increase on the
number of cases received in 2024 (11,091). October 2025 was the
busiest month ever recorded with 1,879 cases logged.

New Cases Processed
(45% increase from 2024)
1800
1600

16,160

1400

In total, the DPC responded to more than 6,500
calls from individuals and organisations, of which
85% were from individuals.
A total of 11,734 cases were concluded in 2025,
representing a 12% increase on the number of
concluded cases in 2024. 9,435 of concluded
cases were received in 2025.

1200
1000

11,091

Cases Concluded
(12% increase from 2024)

800
600

1200

400

1000

11,734

200
0

10,510

800

2024

2025

600
400

The most common issues raised through email
and webforms concerned non-responses to
Subject Access Requests, concerns relating to
the processing of personal data, and issues
relating to social media accounts, many of which
fell outside the scope of the GDPR. Telephone
contacts reflected similar trends. Callers most
frequently sought advice on concerns regarding
the processing of their personal data or guidance
on making a Subject Access Request.

2

200
100
0

2024

2025

Cases are defined as contacts that require further engagement beyond the initial query. Cases in this instance can therefore
include complaints from individuals, but also encompasses requests for advice and guidance which do not include a
complaint element. This figure does not include contacts from the media, speaking invitations, breach notifications or
consultation requests.

Cases and Complaints

19

Top Queries to the DPC in 2025
1. Individuals seeking guidance on nonresponse to Subject Access Requests.
2. Processing of personal data.

3. Social media accounts.

4. How to make a Subject Access Request.

5. Domestic CCTV.
6. Organisations seeking specific
guidance regarding GDPR legislation.
7. Breaches/breach notification.

Exercising of rights under the
GDPR and the use of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) tools.
During 2025, the DPC observed an
increase in individuals using AI tools to
assist them exercise their data protection
rights. While AI tools can assist individuals
in drafting clear and well-structured
correspondence, the DPC recommends
caution with regards to any inputting of
personal data when using these tools.
Individuals should also exercise caution
when using AI tools to generate
complaints on their behalf, as this
can often lead to inaccurate or invalid
requests being submitted. This can
then, in turn, hinder the exercising
of rights, as well as the handling
of any subsequent complaint.

When individuals contact the DPC raising a
concern, the DPC generally engages directly
with the organisation involved, specifically the
organisation’s Data Protection Officer (DPO)
where one has been appointed.
This engagement typically leads to resolution
without requiring further intervention by the DPC.
In situations where escalation is necessary, it is
invaluable for the DPC to have access to written
correspondence between the individual and the
organisation, detailing the issue and the positions
of both parties. This documentation helps
streamline the assessment of a matter raised
by an individual.

20

Cases and Complaints

Complaints
Of the 16,160 new cases3 received in 2025, 3,385
progressed to the complaint-handling process.
This represents a 27% increase on the number
of cases progressing to the complaint-handling
process during 2024.
Overall, the DPC concluded 2,569 complaints in
2025. This included 1,691 complaints received
prior to 2025 and represents a 9% increase on
the 2,357 complaints concluded in 2024.
Complaints received under
the GDPR:
Top 3 Issues in 2025
(75% of overall cases)

% of total

Subject Access Request

42%

Right to erasure

17%

Fair processing

16%

Subject Access Rights
Article 15 of the GDPR provides that an individual
may obtain from an organisation sufficient,
transparent, and easily accessible information
about the processing of their personal data
so that they can be aware of and verify the
lawfulness of the processing and the accuracy
of the processed data. The right of access is
one of the fundamental rights conferred on
individuals by the GDPR. By the end of 2025, the
DPC had received 1,280 complaints solely related
to the right to access, accounting for 42% of all
complaints received through the year.

The DPC continues to observe that organisations
must do more to enhance transparency
and provide individuals with fuller, more
meaningful information when responding to
Subject Access Requests. Although the DPC has
noted improvements in practices across most
organisations, challenges remain.

Subject Access Request Tips
Where organisations rely on exemptions
when responding to a Subject Access
Request, they frequently fail to clearly
explain to the individual the rationale for
applying those restrictions.
Organisations are not adequately
documenting how and why they reach
particular determinations when assessing
a Subject Access Request. Organisations
should prepare a schedule listing any
documents being withheld or redacted,
clearly setting out the reasons for
doing so and identifying the specific
provisions of the 2018 Act or the relevant
GDPR articles relied upon to restrict
access. This information should then be
communicated to the individual in a clear,
concise, and transparent manner as
part of the response to their
Subject Access Request.

As in previous years, alleged noncompliance with
Subject Access Requests remains the primary
source of complaints to the DPC. A review of
these complaints indicates that the majority
of the complaints received have underlying
issues at their core, such as, a deterioration in
an employer–employee relationship, disputes
involving financial matters, or situations that
effectively began as poor customer service rather
than a particular data protection concern.
3

Cases are defined as contacts that require further engagement beyond the initial query. Cases in this instance can therefore
include complaints from individuals, but also encompasses requests for advice and guidance which do not include a
complaint element. This figure does not include contacts from the media, speaking invitations, breach notifications or
consultation requests.

Cases and Complaints

21

Once a complaint has been submitted to
the DPC, an organisation’s ability to clearly
demonstrate the analysis underpinning its
decision-making process will help expedite the
DPC’s examination of the matter. This provides
benefits to organisations, individuals, and the
DPC alike. Where responses are comprehensive
and exemptions have been appropriately and
reasonably applied, such cases may be suitable
for progression through the DPC’s fasttrack
complaint assessment and early-resolution unit.

Right to Rectification
Article 16 of the GDPR provides for
the rectification of personal data where the
personal data that is being processed is
inaccurate, or, taking into account the
purposes of processing, the data is incomplete
in some way.
Organisations are obliged to rectify inaccurate
personal data when it becomes apparent,
whether through their own processes or
following a request from an individual. If personal
data is identified as inaccurate as a matter of
fact, or incomplete, the organisation must take
steps to amend this by correcting or completing
the personal data. If an organisation is unable
to correct it directly, it may, where appropriate,
meet its obligations by adding a supplementary
statement to clarify and rectify the inaccuracy.
The right to rectification applies, in particular, to
matters of fact, which are often misinterpreted.
A ‘matter of fact’ refers to information that can
be objectively proven true or false. The right is
usually not applicable to requests where the
subject matter relates to an opinion or subjective
assessments (unless the factual basis of the
opinion is incorrect).

22

Right to Rectification Examples
The opinion of medical professionals is
often the subject matter of rectification
requests submitted as complaints to the
DPC which is not rectifiable. The DPC often
receives complaints where the individual
complaint relates to historical medical
opinions or diagnoses contained within a
patient’s records. While a diagnosis may
subsequently be revised or updated as new
information becomes available, this does
not render the original diagnosis factually
inaccurate or subject to rectification. A
diagnosis should be understood as a
point-in-time assessment, reflecting the
professional judgement of the healthcare
provider based on the information
available at that specific moment.
Even where underlying clinical information
evolves, leading to a different opinion
or diagnosis at a later stage, the original
record remains an accurate account
of what was assessed and recorded
at that time. Accordingly, it is factually
correct to retain both the existence
of the original opinion or diagnosis
and its content as part of the medical
record. In such circumstances, the data
cannot be considered inaccurate, as it
faithfully represents a contemporaneous
professional assessment. Therefore,
the right to rectification is unlikely to
apply where the information in question
constitutes an accurate historical record.
Another reason a medical opinion or
diagnosis is likely not open to rectification
is that it provides important context
for any subsequent medical treatment
decisions made by a healthcare provider.
A prior opinion or diagnosis may explain
why certain medications were prescribed
or certain treatment plans adopted.
Maintaining these records is not only
required as a matter of law, it serves the
public interest by ensuring the individual
and the treating professional have a

Cases and Complaints

reliable record of what has taken place.
If a medical record is not open to
rectification, it may still be possible for a
supplementary statement to be attached
to the medical record outlining where the
individual believes the data is inaccurate
or incomplete.
In one case dealt with by the DPC the
use of the words ‘multiple carers’ in a
report was requested to be rectified, on
the basis that the complainant believed
it suggested that they placed a child
in the care of multiple people, which
was disputed. The individual was of
the opinion that it would not be in the
interest of the child or their family to have
such wording documented in a report.
The DPC determined that the use of
the term ‘multiple carers’ was accurate
as to a matter of fact as it reflected the
organisation’s involvement with the
child at a point in time, specifically that
the child was being cared for by medical
professionals. The complainant’s belief
that an individual reading the report may
make a certain assumption about them,
owing to the use of the words ‘multiple
carers’, amounted to a disagreement
between the complainant and the
organisation, and therefore did not
meet the Article 16 requirements.

Further examples related to cases the DPC
has examined are available in the Case Studies
Booklet relating to a rectification request relating
to a report which had been ordered by the Irish
Circuit Court and a rectification request that was
submitted to a taxation authority.

Erasure Requests
Individuals have the right to ask an organisation
to delete their personal data. This is known as
the ‘right to erasure’. This is not an absolute right
and applies only in certain situations, such as
when an organisation no longer needs the data,
consent has been withdrawn, or where the data
was used unlawfully.
Erasure requests are among the most common
issues raised with the DPC, accounting for 17%
of all complaints. Often complaints occur due to
a delay in response from the organisation or
a lack of clear explanation as to why the data
cannot be deleted.

Erasure Request Tips
Organisations should ensure they offer
clear explanations in plain language,
detailing why data cannot be erased
and how long it will be kept. Clear
communication between individuals
and organisations often resolves issues
early, mitigating the need for the DPC
to intervene.

Cases and Complaints

23

Complaint Handling
The DPC processes complaints under four main
legal frameworks:
•

General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
which has been given further effect by the
Data Protection Act 2018 (2018 Act);

•

Law Enforcement Directive (LED), which has
been transposed into Irish law by Parts 5
and 6 of the 2018 Act;

•

Data Protection Acts, 1988 and 2003; and

•

S.I. 336/2011 – European Communities
(Electronic Communications Networks
and Services) (Privacy and Electronic
Communications) Regulations 2011.

Article 57(1)(f) of the GDPR mandates that
the DPC handle complaints ‘to the extent
appropriate’ depending on ‘the subject matter of
the complaint’. Under section 109(1) of the 2018
Act, ‘the Commission shall examine the complaint,
to the extent appropriate, and shall, in accordance
with this section, take such action in respect of it as
the Commission, having regard to the nature and
circumstances, considers appropriate’. Accordingly,
once a concern has been assessed as a
complaint—namely that the matter relates to the
processing of the individual’s personal data; that
there may have been a potential infringement of
the individual’s data protection rights and it has
been established that the DPC is the appropriate
authority to examine the complaint—the
complaint progresses to a complaint handling
unit and an examination is conducted in
accordance with the legislative requirements.

24

In 2025, the DPC received an unprecedented
volume of cases, with an increase of 45% in
total cases received when compared against
2024. This has had a direct impact on the DPC’s
response times and case-handling timeframes.
The DPC continued to implement measures to
streamline its case-handling processes. When
engaging with both individuals and organisations,
the DPC will be specific about the information/
supporting documents it requires to examine
queries and complaints to avoid it having to
issue repeated requests for information or
documentation from parties which can hinder
the complaint handling process and leads to
frustration between the parties.

Site Visits
In cases where data controllers have not
responded to a rights request or fail to engage
with the DPC in the examination of a complaint,
the DPC routinely carries out site visits to
premises. This is undertaken to determine
whether the organisation or business remains
operational, in order to highlight to smaller
businesses what their responsibilities are under
the GDPR, or to ensure receipt of documents
prior to considering use of enforcement powers.
In 2025, a total of 13 site visits were conducted
with organisations who had failed to engage with
the DPC’s complaint process or who had failed to
respond to a rights request. The premises visited
included restaurants, a GP’s surgery, a solicitor’s
office, and the business premises (CRO registered
addresses) of a number of sole traders. In some
cases, the visits confirmed that a business was
no longer operational. In other cases, it resulted
in co-operation from the business owner when
their responsibilities under GDPR were explained
to them. Site visits included cases where the DPC
confirmed a record of the personal data sought
was not processed at all or any longer.

Cases and Complaints

Complaint Outcomes

Complaint Dismissals

The outcome of a complaint depends on
whether the processing in question is of a
cross-border nature.

During 2025, the DPC formally rejected or
dismissed 53 cases: 19 non-cross-border and 34
cross-border in nature. It is sometimes the case
that individuals contact the DPC raising issues
that are not related to their data protection
rights, or equally where they believe that data
protection legislation will resolve an entirely
unrelated issue.

In many cases, both during the initial review and
throughout the examination process, complaints
can be resolved through the provision of
information and guidance by the DPC, including
clarification of relevant aspects of data protection
law. A significant number of complaints are also
amicably resolved following DPC intervention,
for example where organisations are reminded
of their obligations or directed to published DPC
or EDPB guidance to ensure individuals’ data
protection rights are upheld. This can often be
the optimal outcome for an individual, where
the subject matter raised does not pose a risk to
the individual, or where a misunderstanding or
miscommunication between the parties has led
to the matter being referred to the DPC in the
first instance.
With regard to cases which are determined not
to be related to cross-border processing which
have not been amicably resolved, section 109(5)
of the 2018 Act applies. This section sets out the
grounds under which the DPC may conclude a
complaint outside of an inquiry process. These
grounds include: rejecting or dismissing a
complaint where no infringement is found; the
issuing of advice to a complainant regarding
the subject matter of the complaint; the issuing
of enforcement notices compelling a controller
to comply with a right that has been exercised;
the issuing of a reprimand; or any other action
that the DPC deems appropriate taking into
consideration factors related to the complaint
and any mitigating actions the controller has
taken during the examination of the complaint.
Where the DPC identifies a minor infringement
of data protection legislation that presents a
minimal risk to the individual, the DPC may issue
advice or instructions to the controller regarding
their current practices, procedures or the manner
in which they have engaged with the complaint,
with the aim of promoting improved compliance.

The DPC triages such cases, providing
information as to the extent and limitations of
GDPR rights, and rejects or dismisses cases as
required in order to ensure that the resources
of the office are applied to cases where greater
risk to individuals is apparent and to which the
GDPR applies.
The DPC dismisses cases where, upon
undertaking an examination of the subject
matter of the complaint, determines that the
organisation to which the complaint relates has
not contravened any articles under the GDPR
or the 2018 Acts. In this regard, in 2025 the DPC
dismissed cases related to complaints against
both public and private companies, including:
•

cases related to the ‘Right to be Forgotten’,
where individuals sought to have specific
articles delisted from search engines. In many
cases the DPC found it to be in the public
interest for those articles to remain available,
outweighing the right of the individual to have
same removed;

•

cases related to employment disputes and
investigations resulting from same, where
the details of the investigations were shared
with individuals to whom the complaints
related to; and

•

cases where the processing of personal
data for the purpose of exercising the right
to freedom of expression and information,
including processing for journalistic purposes,
was determined to override a complainant’s
right to erasure of specified articles relating to
them. A large number of these type of cases
relate to the reporting by a newspaper of
proceedings related to criminal convictions
passed down by the courts.

Cases and Complaints

25

Reprimands
Reprimands are a reactive corrective measure
that can be and are used by the DPC. A
reprimand is a formal, written corrective power
issued by the DPC to a controller (or processor)
in circumstances where the DPC considers that
the data processing has infringed the 2018
Act and/or the GDPR. A reprimand serves as
an official, formal statement of disapproval
indicating that an organisation has not complied
with its regulatory obligations. Reprimands serve
as a public record of non-compliance and form
part of the assessment for potential future,
more severe enforcement action.

26

Cases and Complaints

Case Study: DPC issues
a reprimand to the Irish
Prison Service

KEY TAKEAWAY:

The DPC received a complaint from an individual against their
employer, the Irish Prison Service, in relation to its use of video
surveillance systems in the workplace. Whilst the individual
acknowledged that their image was captured on the CCTV cameras
due to the high-risk environment of their workplace, they did not
believe that it was appropriate to use the system’s cameras for
other purposes, such as monitoring employee attendance. The Irish
Prison Service stated that it relied on the individual’s employment
contract as the basis for this processing, which would generally be
consistent with Article 6(1)(b) of the GDPR.
Article 5(1)(a) of the GDPR sets out the requirement for
organisations to be transparent and fair in how personal data
is processed. In this regard, the DPC reviewed the Irish Prison
Service’s CCTV Policy and noted that it stated: ‘CCTV footage and
audio where it is reasonably required to assist in the establishment
of facts in an investigation’, e.g. a disciplinary investigation. When
personal data is processed for health and safety purposes in
high-risk working environments, via CCTV, this would generally
be accepted as being lawful by the DPC.

Prior to processing personal
data, an organisation should
first establish: the reason(s)
why they need to process
personal data; if these reasons
could be satisfied without the
use of personal data, and if the
individual has been informed
that their personal data will be
processed in this manner. An
organisation’s use of personal
data should be clearly defined
from the outset and it must not
further process that personal
data for other incompatible
reasons. It is an organisation’s
responsibility to ensure that it
is in a position to demonstrate
that its processing activities are
being carried out lawfully, fairly
and transparently, as required
under Article 5(2) of the GDPR.

However, in these circumstances, the Irish Prison Service was
also required to demonstrate that its processing of personal data,
specifically the monitoring of the individual’s movements by CCTV
cameras, was necessary and proportionate regarding the scope
of its investigation in circumstances where the complainant had
admitted to the issue at the centre of a disciplinary matter. The
Irish Prison Service did not provide any supporting evidence in this
regard. The DPC therefore determined that the Irish Prison Service
failed to demonstrate: why it was necessary or proportionate to
monitor the individual’s movements using its CCTV cameras; how
its use of the CCTV footage, in a disciplinary process, was in line
with its own CCTV Policy, and; an appropriate lawful basis under
Article 6 of the GDPR.
The DPC concluded that the Irish Prison Service infringed its
obligations to ensure that its processing activities were carried out
transparently, fairly and lawfully. The DPC issued the organisation
with a reprimand under section 109(5) (da) of the Data Protection
Act 2018.

Cases and Complaints

27

Case Study: Reprimand issued
to a telecommunication’s
provider – Vodafone
The DPC received a complaint against Vodafone and Vodafone’s
Intelligent Solutions (hereinafter called ‘the IS provider’). In the
complaint, the complainant alleged that Vodafone unlawfully
processed their email address.
In 2021, the complainant notified Vodafone that their personal
data (i.e. email address) had been erroneously added to a thirdparty customer’s account and requested that Vodafone restrict the
processing of their email address, as they were not a customer.
Vodafone did not action the complainant’s rectification request
made under Article 18 of the GDPR for two years.
Due to Vodafone’s failure to action the complainant’s rectification
request for two years, the complainant felt compelled to submit
an erasure request under Article 17 of the GDPR in 2023 to
Vodafone. Vodafone complied with this request within the required
timeline of one month in compliance with Article 17. However,
it should be noted that if Vodafone had appropriately actioned the
complainant’s original rectification request raised back in 2021,
it would not have required the complainant to submit an erasure
request in 2023.
Furthermore, over the course of four months the complainant
submitted five Subject Access Requests including a number of
Article 15(1) questions under Article 15 of the GDPR to the IS
provider. The IS provider, as the Data Processor, should have
made Vodafone aware that it had received these requests from the
complainant and Vodafone, as the Data Controller, should have
provided the response to these Article 15 requests. However, the
IS provider failed to make Vodafone aware of the requests it had
received from the complainant and as a result, the complainant’s
multiple requests were not responded to by Vodafone or the
IS provider. Vodafone recognised that its technological and
organisational processes had fallen short in this case.
The DPC found that Vodafone failure to respond to the original
rectification request and the five Subject Access Request’s, within
the timeframe as per its obligations under Article 12(3) of the GDPR
and Article 12(4) of the GDPR, demonstrated a systemic failure to
adhere to its obligations as a Data Controller as set out in data
protection legislation.

28

Cases and Complaints

KEY TAKEAWAY:
When an individual notifies
a data controller that their
personal data has inaccurately
been included in a customer’s
account and requests
rectification, the data controller
is obliged to rectify the
inaccurate personal data as
per their obligations under
Article 18 of the GDPR.
Data controllers are required to
have appropriate processes in
place to ensure any rectification
requests are actioned and
a response given in a timely
manner, in accordance with
Article 12(3) of the GDPR.
Due to the inaction and lack of
appropriate processes within
the Data Processor’s systems,
the complainant in this case
study felt required to make
five Subject Access Requests
under Article 15 of the GDPR
to ascertain who had access
to their personal data over the
two-year period where the Data
Controller unlawfully processed
their personal data.
Both Data Controller and
Data Processor in this case
failed to respond to any of the
complainant’s access request’s
and when questioned by the
DPC, failed to acknowledge the
seriousness of the failure of
its organisational measures,
which led to the DPC issuing
a reprimand on concluding its
examination into this complaint.

Complaint-Based Cross-Border Reprimand
Case Studies can be found on pages 49-55 of this
report. Other complaint Case Studies are being
published separately to this report.

Electronic Direct Marketing
Complaints Concluded
(88% increase from 2024)
300

EDPB Key Concepts Project

250

During 2025, the DPC, alongside all other
European data protection authorities, has
been engaged in a project to align statistical
and workload reporting throughout the EEA.
Concluded Cross-Border
This project, launched by the European Data
ProtectionComplaints
Board, aims to collect data on all data
(43%
increase
from
2024)across members
protection authorities’
activities
in a uniform way. Further information on the
EDPB Key Concepts Project can be found on
page 104 of this report.

200

208
Electronic Direct Marketing
150 Complaints
100
50
0

145

Notiﬁcations of Amicable Resolution
increase
2024)investigations
275(41%
electronic
directfrom
marketing
250

were concluded in 2025. This represents an 88%
increase on the figure reported for 2024.

200

This concluded figure of 275 comprises:

150

•

9 complaints from 2023;

100

•

72 complaints from 2024; and

•

194 complaints from 2025.

0

163

115

2024

2025

275

200
150
100

146

50
0

2024

2025

The most frequently reported electronic direct
marketing issues involved:
•

The DPC investigates offences relating
to electronic direct marketing under S.I.
336/2011 – European Communities (Electronic
Communications Networks and Services) (Privacy
and Electronic Communications) Regulations
2011 (‘the
ePrivacy Regulations’).
2025 The ePrivacy
2024
Regulations implement Directive 2002/58/EC
(‘the ePrivacy Directive’) into Irish law.
In 2025, the DPC received 245 new complaints
about electronic direct marketing, representing
an increase of 24% on the 2024 figure. Of these
245 complaints, 73% related to unsolicited emails,
and 11% to unsolicited SMS text messages.

50

250

•

Marketing communications being sent to
individuals without a functional opt-out
mechanism. This included instances where:
›

the opt-out request was ignored by
the organisation;

›

the opt-out mechanism was not working
correctly; or

›

a mechanism was not provided at all.

Marketing communications being sent
without the individual’s explicit consent
(and where no exemptions under the
regulations were applicable).

In 2025, the DPC issued 50 warning letters
to companies on foot of unsolicited marketing
communications.

Organisations must ensure that when
consent is sought for marketing purposes,
that this consent be clearly distinguishable
and not ‘bundled’ in with other requests
for consent. Organisations must also
ensure that their opt-out procedures
work properly and are tested regularly
to ensure their functionality.

Cases and Complaints

29

One-Stop-Shop Complaints
Cross-Border Complaints
where DPC is LSA

The One-Stop-Shop (OSS) mechanism was
established under the GDPR to streamline how
organisations operating across multiple EU
Member States interact with data protection
authorities (referred to as ‘supervisory authorities’
under the GDPR). The OSS enables such
organisations to be overseen by a single Lead
Supervisory Authority (LSA), based on the location
of their ‘main or single establishment’, rather than
being subject to separate regulation by the data
protection authorities of each member state.

33%

67%

An organisation’s main or single establishment is
typically its place of central administration and/
or the location where key decisions about data
processing are made within the EU/EEA. Under
the OSS, the supervisory authority that receives
a complaint acts as a Concerned Supervisory
Authority (CSA). The CSA serves as the
intermediary between the LSA and the individual.
This means that an individual in any EU/EEA
country may submit a complaint either directly
to the LSA or to their local/national authority,
which will then forward it to the LSA. Through
this mechanism, the DPC fulfils its role as a
regulator for EU citizens.
Since the implementation of the GDPR, the
DPC has received a total of 2,189 cross-border
complaints. The DPC has been established as
the Lead Supervisory Authority for 1,927 (88%)
of these complaints.

Lodged with other EU/EEA
Supervisory Authority

30

Lodged Directly with DPC

20

15

10

Concluded Cross-Border
Complaints
(43% increase from 2024)
Valid Data Breaches 2025

5

250

1,519 (79%) of the valid cross-border complaints,
for which the DPC is the LSA, have now been
concluded.

200

Since May 2018, 67% of cross-border complaints,
where the DPC is the LSA, were lodged by
complainants with another EU/EEA supervisory
authority and then transferred to the DPC via the
OSS mechanism. 33% of cross-border complaints
were lodged with the DPC directly.

100

150

208

45%

4%
2%

145

50
0

In 2025, the DPC received 315 valid crossborder complaints, relating to companies for
whom the DPC is the LSA. By year end, the DPC
had concluded 208 cross-border complaints
representing a 43% increase on the 2024 figure.
A total of 34 cross-border cases were rejected
or dismissed in 2025.
30

25

2024

49%
2025

Private
Public
Voluntary/Charity

Notiﬁcations of Amicable Resolution
Other
(41%
increase from 2024)
Cases and Complaints
250

100
50

Of the concluded complaints, the DPC submitted
0
163 notifications through the GDPR Article 60
2025
2024
cooperation mechanism in cases where an
amicable resolution had been achieved. This
represents a 41% increase on the 2024 reported
figure. Details of these cases can be found
published on the EDPB website.

Notiﬁcations of Amicable Resolution
(41% increase from 2024)
250
200
150
100

163
115

50
0

From left to right: Commissioners Dale Sunderland, Des
Hogan and Niamh Sweeney attending the European Data
Protection Board December Plenary in Brussels.

Law Enforcement Directive Complaints
2024

2025

Further information on Complaint-Based
Cross-Border Decisions can be found on pages
49-55 of this report. Cross-Border Case Studies
are being published separately.

The Law Enforcement Directive (LED), as
transposed into Irish law in the 2018 Act,
applies where the processing of personal data is
carried out for the purposes of the prevention,
investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal
offences, or the execution of criminal penalties.
In order for an organisation to engage with these
sections, the organisation must be a ‘competent
authority’ as set out in Section 69 of the 2018 Act.
The main two competent authorities that the
DPC engages with via complaints are An Garda
Síochána (AGS) and the Irish Prison Service.
Statutory Bodies such as the Office of the
Revenue Commissioners, county councils and
the Department of Social Protection also fall
to be considered competent authorities in
relation to a limited number of their functions.
During 2025, the DPC increased its engagement
with competent authorities. Working alongside
the DPC’s supervision units, this engagement
has focused on ensuring that these authorities
provide clear and concise information to
individuals, particularly when responding to
access requests. The DPC has emphasised the
need for competent authorities to use plain
language when explaining why records containing

Cases and Complaints

31

personal data may not be released. In essence,
organisations should more clearly set out the
rationale for withholding some or all of the
requested information as part of their response
to the individual.
Through this work, the DPC aims to improve
the efficiency of its own complaint-handling
processes when asked by members of the public
to review or validate a competent authority’s
decision to limit or restrict disclosure.
In 2025, the DPC received 32 LED complaints
and concluded 11 LED complaints (including
complaints received prior to 2024). Over 65%
of complaints examined by the DPC under the
LED related to Subject Access Requests. Further
information on the LED is available at the DPC
website: Law Enforcement Directive|Data
Protection Commission
Law Enforcement Directive

Direct Intervention

Processing of personal data
of adults at risk of harm or in
vulnerable situations.
Individuals at risk of harm or in vulnerable
situations might not always be in a
position to raise data protection queries
or complaints themselves, nor might they
be in a position to exercise any of their
own data protection rights.
Should a family member or friend wish
to assist that individual with their data
protection concerns, they must have the
legal authority to do so. If they do not
have the legal authority to do so, such as
a letter of authority from that person, or
power of attorney, then the matter often
cannot be addressed by the DPC by way
of standard complaint handling. However,
when such a matter is referred to the
DPC, it can assess the concerns raised
and engage directly with the data
controller as may be required.

The DPC often handles cases which are
particularly sensitive and where immediate
intervention is key to safeguarding the data
protection rights of a large number of people.
This tends to arise in circumstances where a
serious data protection matter has been brought
to the attention of the DPC, but there is no valid
complaint (as defined under Section 107 of the
2018 Act) to progress, as the individual who
brought the matter to the attention of the DPC
is not directly affected by the issue being raised.
When such a matter is brought to the attention
of the DPC, the DPC can directly intervene and
engage with the data controller regarding those
issues. This direct and immediate intervention
can be key to ensuring the safeguarding of the
data protection rights of large numbers
of people.

32

Cases and Complaints

Data Brokers and Phone
Location Data
A broadcast by RTE’s Primetime
programme on 18 September 2025
alleged that an unnamed company was
selling precise location data derived from
devices held by Irish data subjects. The
DPC subsequently established the identity
of this company, and during the year
engaged in detailed correspondence with
it to ascertain details of its processing
activities. As a result of this engagement,
the DPC secured a voluntary suspension
of processing involving location data
relating to Irish users. A number of other
companies linked to the Irish company,
operating in other EU Member States,
were identified during the course of
the DPC’s investigations. At year end,
cooperation was ongoing with the data
protection authorities of those Member
States who are competent for regulating
these companies. The investigation of this
matter remained ongoing at year’s end.
In 2025, the DPC separately wrote
to data brokers based in Ireland to
emphasise the GDPR obligations
which apply to precise
location data.

Cases and Complaints

33

4.
Data Breaches

4. Data Breaches

Cross-Border Complaints
where DPC is LSA

Under the GDPR and the ePrivacy directive, organisations are obliged
to notify personal data breaches to the DPC or33%
relevant supervisory
authority where the breach presents a risk to the affected individuals.
Under the GDPR, organisations must do this within 72 hours of
becoming aware of the breach.
67%

Such GDPR notifications are usually submitted
by an organisation’s Data Protection Officer
(DPO) who can distinguish minor from major
breaches by applying a risk-based approach
to their assessment of the incident. The DPC
engages closely with organisations to understand
and mitigate the risk data breaches poses to
individuals. It is of note that in 2025, 55% of
breaches reported to the DPC were of either
low risk to data subjects, or no risk to data
subjects could be identified. This informed the
DPC’s engagement with organisations with
regards to their reporting obligations. Early
responses can be invaluable in addressing
financial, legal and reputational risks to
organisations as well as in vindicating the
rights of the individuals concerned.
In 2025, the DPC received 6,521 valid data
breach notifications. This represented a 16%
decrease on the overall data breach numbers
received by the DPC in 2024. There may be a
number of reasons for this decrease, including
an organisation improving their compliance
with the GDPR or potentially as a result of an
organisations deeming that certain breaches
have not reached the threshold to report it to
the DPC. Article 33(5) of the GDPR places an
obligation on organisations to record all personal
data breaches and the DPC has commenced an
initiative to examine organisations’ compliance
with this obligation. This initiative will provide
further insight into the nature of breaches which
have occurred, both those reported and not
reported to the DPC.

Of the 6,521 notifications received in 2025,
5,692 were GDPR notifications and of those:
49% related
to the
private
Lodged
with
other sector;
EU/EEA
Supervisory Authority
Lodged
45% to the
publicDirectly
sector;with
andDPC
4% came from the voluntary and
charity sector.

Valid Data Breaches 2025

4%

45%

2%

49%

Private
Public
Voluntary/Charity
Other

Data Breaches

35

50% of notified cases arose as a result of
correspondence being sent to the wrong
recipient. Since the introduction of the GDPR,
and in line with previous years, the highest
category of data breaches notified to the DPC
in 2025 related to unauthorised disclosures in
incidents affecting single individuals or small
groups, accounting for half of total notifications.
Of the breach notifications received in 2025,
the DPC had concluded its assessment in 85%
of cases by year-end.
In keeping with the trend of previous years,
public sector bodies and banks accounted
for the top 10 organisations with the highest
number of breach notifications recorded
against them. Insurance and telecom companies
featured prominently in the top 20. Notably,
correspondence issuing to incorrect recipients
because of poor operational practices and
human error – for example, inserting a
wrong document into an envelope addressed
to an unrelated third party – continued to
feature prominently. The DPC engages with
organisations to make organisations aware
of their obligations and offer guidance. The
DPC continually monitors breach notifications
received to identify trends and inform further
investigative and enforcement actions.

ePrivacy Breaches
In 2025, the DPC received a total of 731 data
breach notifications under SI 336/2011
– European Communities (Electronic
Communications Networks and Services) (Privacy
and Electronic Communications) Regulations
2011 (‘the ePrivacy Regulations’). The ePrivacy
Regulations implement Directive 2002/58/EC
(‘the ePrivacy Directive’) in Irish law. The figure
of 731 represents an increase of 71% on the 428
reported for 2024 and accounted for just over
11% of total valid cases notified for the year.

ePrivacy Data Breach
(71% increase from 2024)
800
700

731

600
500
400

428

300
200
100
0

36

Data Breaches

2024

2025

Of these 731 notifications, 151 were deemed
not to be reportable following assessment.
Fewer than 1.5% of the breaches reported under
S.I. 336/2011 involved more than 100 individuals.
The top three types of breaches reported under
S.I. 336/2011 can be categorised as follows:
•

communications misdirected to the
wrong recipients on foot of postal addresses/
Eircode’s being recorded incorrectly or
postal details not being updated by data
subjects (35%);

•

social engineering/phishing scams (third
parties gaining access to customer accounts,
including access to personal data) (34%); and

•

incorrect recording of details due to human
error, which resulted in a breach due to
communications being sent to the wrong
email address or phone number (22%).

Top Three Types of Breaches
Reported Under S.I. 336/2011

35%

Communications
misdirected to the wrong
recipients on foot of
postal addresses/Eircodes
being recorded incorrectly
or postal details not being
updated by data subjects

34%

Social engineering/phishing
scams

22%

Incorrect recording of details
due to human error

Over one-third of breaches notified to the
DPC under S.I. 336/2011 were as a result of
phishing scams. Phishing is a process whereby
someone fraudulently attempts to trick users
into disclosing sensitive information, such
as usernames and passwords, by disguising
themselves as a trusted source in an electronic
communication. The DPC received a number of
breach notifications in 2025 whereby malicious
actors had targeted customers through SMS
phishing and fraudulently obtained their
passwords/one-time passcodes, in order to gain
access to customers’ online portal accounts.
The DPC considers the implementation of multifactor authentication to be a baseline security
standard when it comes to providing access
to online accounts. Following this increase in
unauthorised disclosure incidents on foot of
phishing in 2025, the DPC intends to engage
further with the telecommunications sector in
2026 in relation to the security measures that
they have in place.

Law Enforcement Directive Breaches
The DPC also received 92 valid breach
notifications in relation to law enforcement
matters submitted under the notification
requirements of the Law Enforcement Directive
which was transposed into Irish law by the
2018 Act.

Data Breach Case Studies are being published
separately to this report.

Data Breaches

37

5.

Decisions and
Inquiries

5. Decisions and Inquiries
Statutory Inquiries by the DPC
Under section 110 of the 2018 Act, the DPC may conduct two
different types of statutory inquiry in order to establish whether
an infringement of the GDPR or the 2018 Act has occurred:
• a complaint-based inquiry; and
• an inquiry of the DPC’s ‘own volition’.
As of 31 December 2025, the DPC had 87
Statutory Inquiries on-hand, including 53
Cross-Border Inquiries. Notably, following
amendments made to the Data Protection
Act 2018, the DPC is empowered to impose
reprimands on data controllers and data
processors as part of its complaint-handling
procedures—a corrective power previously
reserved for statutory inquiries only.

The DPC issued 10 Final Decisions and 92
Provisional Decisions in 2025, with regulated
entities given an opportunity to make
submissions on proposed findings in all cases.
Seven of these Final Decisions and 88 of these
Provisional Decisions were in accordance with
the Article 60 co-decision making process.

Overview of Final Decisions taken in 2025
Name

Date of Decision

Fine

Corrective Measures Imposed

Microsoft Ireland
Operations
Limited

20 February 2025

N/A

No infringement found. Complaint
dismissed in accordance with Section 113(2)
(a) of the Data Protection Act 2018, as
amended, and in accordance with Article
57(1)(f) of the GDPR.

Patreon Ireland
Ltd

3 April 2025

N/A

Reprimand issued for infringements in
relation to Article 12(2) and 12(3) of the
GDPR.

TikTok
Technology
Limited (TikTok)

30 April 2025

€530,000,000

Yahoo EMEA
Limited

6 May 2025

N/A

The DPC found that TikTok infringed Articles
46(1) and 13(1)(f) of the GDPR. The DPC
issued an order requiring TikTok to suspend
transfers of EU/EEA user data to China and
an order requiring it to bring its processing
into compliance.
Reprimand issued for an infringement in
relation to Article 13(2)(a) of the GDPR.

Decisions and Inquiries

39

Name

Date of Decision

Fine

Department of
Social Protection

9 June 2025

€550,000

The DPC found that the Department
infringed Articles 5(1)(a), 6(1), 9(1), 5(1)(e),
13(1)(c), 13(2)(a), 35(7)(b) and 35(7)(c) of the
GDPR. The DPC issued an order to cease
processing of biometric data related to SAFE
2 registration within nine months unless a
valid lawful basis can be identified. The DPC
also issued a reprimand in respect of the
infringements.

City of Dublin
Education and
Training Board
(CDETB)

18 June 2025

€125,000

The DPC found that CDETB infringed Articles
5(1)(f), 32(1), 32(2), 33(1), 34(1) and 34(4) of
the GDPR. The DPC issued an order to bring
processing into compliance with the GDPR’s
security requirements. The DPC also issued
a reprimand in respect of the infringements.

Cubic Telecom

28 July 2025

N/A

Reprimand issued for an infringement in
relation to Article 15 of the GDPR.

Meta Platforms
Ireland Limited
(MPIL)

5 August 2025

N/A

No infringement found. MPIL was found
to have sufficiently demonstrated its
compliance under Article 15(4) of the GDPR.

Microsoft Ireland
Operations
Limited

1 September
2025

N/A

Microsoft Ireland Operations Limited
was ordered to bring its processing into
compliance and was issued a reprimand in
relation to Articles 12(4) and 5(1)(a) of the
GDPR.

University of
Limerick

11 December
2025

€98,000

The DPC found that the University of
Limerick infringed Articles 5(1)(f), 32(1),
30(1), 33(1) and 34(1) of the GDPR. The DPC
imposed a reprimand in respect of these
infringements.

Confirmation of Administrative Fines
In 2025, the DPC imposed over €530 million
in administrative fines. These included fines
imposed on TikTok Technology Limited over the
transfer of the personal data of European users
to China, as well as fines against the Department
of Social Protection and City of Dublin Education
and Training Board.
All fines imposed by the DPC must be confirmed
in court before they can be collected. Once
collected, fines are remitted to the central
exchequer in Ireland.

40

Corrective Measures Imposed

In 2025, the DPC collected and remitted a total
of €125,000 from one administrative fine to the
central exchequer in Ireland. The relevant fine
was collected from City of Dublin Education and
Training Board which was confirmed in the Dublin
Circuit Court in 2025.

Since May 2018,
the DPC has issued
€4.04 billion in fines.

Decisions and Inquiries

Domestic Decisions that Concluded in 2025
Inquiry regarding Department
of Social Protection
In June 2025, the DPC adopted a Final Decision
finding that the Department of Social Protection
(DSP) infringed Articles 5(1)(a), 5(1)e, 6(1), 9(1),
13(1)(c), 13(2)(a) and 37(5) of the GDPR. The
Decision concerned the lawfulness, fairness
and transparency of the DSP’s processing of
biometric facial templates in the context of SAFE 2
registration for the Public Services Card (PSC). The
processing examined under the Inquiry included
the collection, processing and retention of facial
templates generated by the DSP from individuals
applying for, or renewing, a PSC.
The Inquiry followed a prior DPC investigation,
which was concluded in 2019, concerning
certain aspects of the DSP’s processing of
personal data in connection with the issuance
of Public Services Cards. The Inquiry considered
if the DSP had an appropriate lawful basis for
processing biometric data under Articles 5(1)
(a), 6(1) and 9(1) of the GDPR and if the DSP
had provided individuals with sufficiently clear
and transparent information regarding the
processing to the extent that it was foreseeable
to individuals that their biometric data would be
processed by the DSP and the purposes of the
processing. The Inquiry further considered if the
DSP’s Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA)
complied with the requirements of the DPIA
under the GDPR.

In its Decision, the DPC found that the DSP had
not identified a valid lawful basis for processing
biometric data and therefore infringed Articles
5(1)(a), 6(1) and 9(1) of the GDPR. The DPC also
found that the DSP had infringed Article 5(1)(e) of
the GDPR in unlawfully retaining facial templates.
The Decision also found that the DSP infringed
Articles 13(3)(c) and 13(2)(a) of the GDPR for
failing to provide data subjects with sufficiently
clear and transparent information about the
processing of biometric data and a breach of
Article 35(7)(b) and (c) of the GDPR as the DSP
did not include details required by the GDPR
in its DPIA for SAFE 2 registration.
In the Decision, the DPC issued a formal
reprimand to the DSP and imposed fines
totalling €550,000. The DPC ordered the DSP to
cease biometric data processing related to SAFE
2 registration within nine months unless a valid
lawful basis can be established. This Decision
has been appealed by the DSP.
Inquiry concerning
Department of Social
Protection

Decisions and Inquiries

41

Inquiry regarding City of Dublin
Education and Training Board
In June 2025, the DPC adopted a Final Decision
finding that the City of Dublin Education and
Training Board (CDETB) infringed Articles 5(1)
(f), 32(1) and 32(2), 33(1), 34(1) and 34(4) of the
GDPR. CDETB is the State education and training
authority for Dublin city and is also responsible
for Student Universal Support Ireland (SUSI), the
national awarding authority for student grants.
CDETB notified the DPC of a personal data breach
regarding its web server which was retaining the
personal data of student grant applicants who
had uploaded information related to their grant
applications through the SUSI website, as well
as the discovery of malware on the web server.
The breach impacted approximately 13,000 data
subjects, identifiable by email address, who had
submitted supplementary forms through the
SUSI website during 2017 and 2018. The personal
data impacted by the breach included names,
surnames, birth dates, PPSNs, contact details,
identification data, and special categories of data
(such as data revealing racial or ethnic origin and
health data).
The DPC assessed CDETB’s technical and
organisational measures for ensuring the
security of personal data that it processed on
its website in light of the risks presented. Those
risks included the risk of unauthorised access
or disclosure of personal data to third parties.
They also included risks of accidental or unlawful
destruction, alteration, or loss of availability of
the personal data processed on the website.
The DPC also examined CDETB’s compliance with
its obligation to notify breaches to the DPC
promptly, as well as CDETB’s obligation to notify
data subjects of the breach. In this matter, the DPC
specifically requested CDETB to notify affected data
subjects, but it declined to do so until 16 December
2020, which was over two years after it became
aware of the breach.

The DPC’s Decision found that CDETB:
•

infringed Articles 5(1)(f), 32(1) and 32(2) of the
GDPR by failing to implement appropriate
technical and organisational measures to
ensure a level of security appropriate to the
risk presented by its processing of personal
data on the SUSI website, and by failing to
assess the appropriate level of security;

•

infringed Article 33(1) of the GDPR by failing
to notify the DPC of the breach without undue
delay;

•

infringed Article 34(1) of the GDPR by failing to
notify the affected data subjects of the breach
without undue delay; and

•

infringed Article 34(4) of the GDPR by failing to
communicate the breach to data subjects when
required to do so by the DPC.

The DPC issued a number of corrective measures
on foot of the infringements found in the
inquiry, including: a reprimand; an order to
CDETB to bring its processing into compliance
with the GDPR’s security requirements; and
administrative fines totalling €125,000.
However, the DPC considered the actions taken
by CDETB and its engagement with the DPC,
since being presented with the DPC’s proposed
findings in a draft version of its Decision, to be
commendable. CDETB accepted each of the
findings of infringements set out in the draft
Decision, acknowledged full responsibility for
the breach, apologised to both the data subjects
affected and the DPC, and proactively took steps,
without having specifically been directed to do
so by the DPC, to reduce the likelihood of similar
breaches occurring in future. As a result, the DPC
decided to impose a substantially lower total fine
than the fining range proposed in the
Draft Decision.
Inquiry into City of
Dublin Education and
Training Board

42

Decisions and Inquiries

Inquiry regarding University
of Limerick
Between 30 November 2018 and 20 January
2020, University of Limerick (UL) notified the
DPC of 12 personal data breaches: in six of
them, unauthorised persons gained access to
the work email accounts of UL staff members
by means of phishing attacks. The unauthorised
users were able, in some cases, to set up
forwarding rules which diverted emails containing
specified keywords to a folder they had created
in the user’s mailbox. The compromised email
accounts contained personal data including
identity information, contact details, PPSNs, bank
information, medical or legal documentation,
staff disciplinary and HR records, and data
belonging to students, staff, and external parties.
The DPC carried out this own-volition Inquiry
under sections 110 and 111 of the Data
Protection Act 2018. It assessed UL’s compliance
with: Articles 5(1)(f) and 32(1) of the GDPR
(implementation of appropriate technical and
organisational measures to ensure appropriate
security of the personal data processed on
its email service); Article 30(1) of the GDPR
(maintenance of a record of processing activities);
Article 33(1) of the GDPR (notification to the DPC
of personal data breaches without undue delay,
and in any event within 72 hours of becoming
aware of them); and Article 34(1) of the GDPR
(notification to concerned data subjects without
undue delay of personal data breaches assessed
to pose a high risk).

In its Final Decision of December 2025, the
DPC found that UL did not implement
appropriate technical and organisational
measures to ensure the security of personal
data as required by Articles 5(1)(f) and 32(1) of
the GDPR. The DPC also found that UL’s initial
record of processing activity did not fully comply
with the requirements of Article 30(1) of the
GDPR, although UL implemented a compliant
record of processing activity in May 2020, after
the period assessed by the DPC in this Inquiry.
The DPC found that three breach notifications
were filed more than 72 hours after UL became
aware of them and, therefore, were not reported
without undue delay in accordance with Article
33(1) of the GDPR. With respect to Article 34(1)
of the GDPR, the Inquiry found that UL had
failed in three cases to inform persons affected
by a high-risk breach without undue delay. The
DPC therefore found infringements of Articles
5(1)(f), 32(1), 30(1), 33(1), and 34(1) of the
GDPR and issued UL with a reprimand and
administrative fine of €98,000.
The DPC’s decisions on corrective measures
took account of UL’s significant steps to
remediate the deficiencies in its processing of
personal data identified in this Inquiry. Based
on the details of those improvements provided
by UL in its submissions, the DPC decided that
it was not necessary or proportionate for it to
issue an order for UL to bring that processing
into compliance with the GDPR. The DPC’s
acknowledgement of those improvements
does not, however, relieve UL of its obligation
to continually evaluate the effectiveness of its
measures and the measures that are necessary
to ensure a level of security that is appropriate
to the dynamic risk presented by its processing.
Inquiry Concerning the
University of Limerick

Decisions and Inquiries

43

Domestic Cases that Reached a
Key Investigative Stage in 2025
Permanent TSB plc

Central Bank of Ireland

The DPC commenced this Inquiry following three
separate breach notifications from Permanent
TSB plc (PTSB) in May 2022. The personal data
breach notifications concerned circumstances
where malicious actors, in possession of certain
customer information, attempted to gain access
to data subjects’ bank accounts and amend
account details by calling PTSB’s Open24 call
centre and posing as those customers. The scope
of the Inquiry concerns the organisational and
technical measures implemented by PTSB in
the Open24 call centre, to ensure the security of
personal data, and whether PTSB complied with
its obligations to notify the DPC of data breaches
without undue delay. The DPC issued a Draft
Decision to PTSB in August 2025. PTSB made
submissions on the Draft Decision and at yearend the DPC was preparing its Final Decision in
the Inquiry.

The DPC opened an ownvolition Inquiry in
October 2023 after the Central Bank of Ireland
reported a personal data breach earlier in
the year involving the Central Credit Register
database.

Children’s Health Ireland, Tallaght
University Hospital
During 2025, protected disclosures regarding
certain processing activities within one specific
facility at Children’s Health Ireland (CHI) at
Tallaght University Hospital were received by
the DPC. The DPC also received a data breach
notification related to the unauthorised
access and disclosure of a child’s medical
file at this facility.

The DPC issued a Statement of Issues in
September 2025, setting out a focused overview
of the facts established during the Inquiry and
outlining the matters to be determined during
the Inquiry’s decisionmaking stage. The Central
Bank of Ireland submitted observations on the
Statement of Issues. At year-end, the DPC was
assessing those submissions.

An Post GeoDirectory DAC (Designated
Activity Company)
In July 2023, the DPC commenced an ownvolition Inquiry concerning the products and
services offered by An Post GeoDirectory DAC.
The DPC issued a Statement of Issues to An
Post GeoDirectory DAC in November 2025
which provided a focused overview of the facts
established during the inquiry and identified
a principal preliminary issue to be determined
during the Inquiry’s decision-making stage. An
Post GeoDirectory DAC made submissions in
response and at year-end the matter was ongoing.

Following a review of these disclosures and
engagement with the DPO of the facility at
CHI, the DPC carried out an unannounced
site inspection. Following this inspection,
the DPC subsequently commenced an
Inquiry on 14 August 2025. At year-end
the matter was ongoing.

44

Decisions and Inquiries

HSE Dublin and Mid-Leinster
(Tullamore)
The DPC commenced an own-volition Inquiry in
October 2019 in relation to a ransomware attack
that affected the processing being conducted
within a laboratory system in the Midlands
Regional Hospital, Tullamore. The scope of the
Inquiry concerns the organisational and technical
measures implemented by the HSE in relation
to that system and the manner in which the HSE
responded to the attack. The DPC completed its
Final Inquiry Reports on those matters in March
2021 and issued its Draft Decision to the HSE
in December 2025.

Cross-Border Cases
Where a particular inquiry or complaint concerns
the examination of cross-border processing,
the GDPR requires the DPC, where it acts as the
Lead Supervisory Authority (LSA), to conclude
its decision in accordance with the cooperation
mechanism set out in Article 60 of the GDPR.
The Article 60 mechanism outlines a procedure
designed to facilitate the conclusion of decisions
on the basis of consensus between the LSA and
other European Data Protection Authorities,
known as Concerned Supervisory Authorities
(CSAs). In accordance with the GDPR and its duty
of sincere cooperation, the DPC cooperates with
its peer EU/EEA regulators throughout the inquiry
process. Through the Article 60 mechanism, CSAs
are enabled to share their views on the inquiry
or complaint (as the case may be) with the LSA,
which must take due account of their views.
Where those views take the form of a relevant
and reasoned objection, the LSA must take
account of those objections by amending its draft
decision, failing which it must refer the objections
to the European Data Protection Board for
determination pursuant to the Dispute Resolution
process set out in Article 65 of the GDPR.

Decisions and Inquiries

45

Large-Scale Cross-Border Cases
that Concluded in 2025
Inquiry regarding TikTok Technology Limited’s transfers
of EEA users’ personal data to servers located in China
In April 2025, the DPC adopted a Final Decision
finding that TikTok Technology Limited (TikTok)
had infringed Articles 13(1)(f) and 46(1) of the
GDPR regarding its transfers of EEA user data to
China. The transfers of personal data considered
in the Decision consisted of TikTok’s transfers
of EEA user data to China by way of remote
access to that personal data by personnel of the
ByteDance group of companies who are based
in China.
In the Decision, the DPC found that TikTok
infringed Article 46(1) of the GDPR during the
temporal scope of the Inquiry by carrying out the
data transfers while failing to verify, guarantee
and demonstrate that that the personal data
of EEA users subject to the data transfers
was afforded a level of protection essentially
equivalent to that guaranteed within the
European Union.
The DPC found that TikTok infringed Article
13(1)(f) of the GDPR from 29 July 2020 to
1 December 2022 by failing to provide data
subjects with required information on the data
transfers and information on how the processing
concerned remote access to personal data stored
in Singapore and the United States by personnel
based in China.

During the Inquiry, TikTok informed the DPC that
it did not store EEA user data on servers located
in China. Rather, TikTok’s position, until after the
DPC submitted its Draft Decision to the GDPR
cooperation mechanism, was that its transfers
of EEA User Data to China consisted of remote
access to that personal data by personnel of
the ByteDance group of companies in China.
Accordingly, the Decision considered whether
those transfers by way of remote access complied
with Chapter V of the GDPR. The DPC’s Decision
was appealed by TikTok (see the Litigation section
of this report).
In April 2025, TikTok informed the DPC of an
issue that it discovered that resulted in limited
EEA user data being stored on servers in China.
TikTok informed the DPC that this had resulted
in TikTok providing inaccurate information to
the Inquiry. While the Decision related to TikTok’s
transfers by way of remote access only, the
Decision expressed the DPC’s deep concern that
TikTok had submitted inaccurate information to
that inquiry.
On 4 July 2025, the DPC commenced a separate
own-volition Inquiry to consider the
lawfulness of these transfers as set out on
page 47 of this report.

Having considered the infringements of the
GDPR as set out above, the DPC decided to order
TikTok to suspend the data transfers and to
bring the processing into compliance. The DPC
also imposed two administrative fines totalling
€530 million. This Decision has been appealed
by TikTok.

46

Decisions and Inquiries

Fiosrúchán maidir le TikTok
Technology Limited

Large-Scale Cross-Border Cases Inquiries that
Reached a Key Investigative Stage in 2025
Inquiry regarding X Internet
Unlimited Company
In April 2025, the DPC commenced this ownvolition Inquiry relating to the processing of
personal data comprised in publicly-accessible
posts, posted on the X social media platform by
EEA users, associated with the development of
the Grok AI models.
The Inquiry is considering X Internet Unlimited
Company’s (XIUC) compliance with a range of
provisions of the GDPR, including with regard
to the lawfulness of the processing of personal
data, compliance with the principle of purpose
limitation, and transparency. A notice of
commencement issued to XIUC in April 2025 and
submissions in response to a number of rounds
of queries have been received from XIUC. The
information gathering phase of the Inquiry was
ongoing at year-end.

Inquiry regarding TikTok Technology
Limited transfers of EEA users’
personal data to servers located
in China
In July 2025, the DPC commenced this ownvolition Inquiry relating to TikTok Technology
Limited’s (TikTok) transfers of EEA users’ personal
data to servers located in China. The Inquiry
follows on from the DPC’s Decision of 30 April
2025 in relation to a separate TikTok Inquiry
(see above), which also considered TikTok’s
transfers of EEA users’ personal data to China.
However, during that previous Inquiry, TikTok
maintained that transfers of EEA users’ personal
data to China took place by way of remote access
only and that EEA user data was not stored on
servers located within China, i.e. EEA user data
was stored on servers located outside of China
and was accessed remotely by TikTok staff from
within China. Accordingly, the DPC’s Decision of
30 April 2025 did not consider TikTok’s storage
of EEA users’ personal data on servers located in
China. In April 2025, TikTok informed the DPC of
an issue that it had discovered in February 2025

where limited EEA user data had in fact been
stored on servers in China, contrary to TikTok’s
evidence to the previous Inquiry.
The DPC expressed its deep concern that
TikTok had submitted inaccurate information
to the previous Inquiry. In its press release
issued at the time of the conclusion of that
Inquiry, the DPC stated that it was taking
those developments ‘very seriously’ and was
‘considering what further regulatory action may
be warranted, in consultation with our peer EU
Data Protection Authorities’. As a result of those
considerations, the DPC decided to open this
new Inquiry into TikTok under section 110
of the Data Protection Act 2018. The purpose
of the Inquiry is to determine whether TikTok
has complied with its relevant obligations under
the GDPR in the context of the transfers now at
issue, including the lawfulness of the transfers
pursuant to Chapter V of the GDPR. Throughout
the year, the DPC gathered relevant information
and conducted an on-site inspection at TikTok’s
offices in November 2025.

Meta Platforms Ireland Limited
This complaint-based Inquiry concerns data
subject rights under the GDPR. In 2018, the
complainant made a written request to Meta,
pursuant to the right of access and right to
data portability. This request concerned certain
information held in Meta databases, which was
not otherwise accessible to users by means of
automated access tools. The DPC subsequently
commenced an Inquiry to assess whether
Meta’s refusal of the complainant’s request was
compliant with the GDPR.
In October 2025, the DPC issued a Preliminary
Draft Decision, which sets out a detailed
analysis of the legal and factual issues arising,
and includes the DPC’s provisional findings. In
December 2025, Meta initiated Judicial Review
proceedings challenging the Preliminary Draft
Decision.

Decisions and Inquiries

47

Cross-Border Cases involving Individual
Complainants Concluded by DPC
through EU Co-Operation Procedure
in 2025
In addition to these large-scale inquiries, the DPC also concludes
individual cross-border cases, including notifications of outcomes
achieved in complaints amicably resolved through the EU
cooperation procedure.
In 2025, the DPC concluded 208 cross-border complaint cases
through the Article 60 procedure, including 163 notifications of
complaints amicably resolved and six decisions. This represents
an increase of 42% from 2024. Details of the amicably resolved
notifications will be published on the EDPB Article 60 case register.

48

Complaint-Based Cross-Border
Decisions that Concluded in 2025
KEY TAKEAWAYS:

Microsoft Ireland Operations Limited:
Right to Be Forgotten
The DPC received a complaint directly from an EU/EEA citizen living
outside of Ireland. The complaint concerned a Right to be Forgotten
(RtbF) request submitted to Microsoft in relation to three URLs
returned by its Bing search engine when the individual’s name was
entered as a search term. The URLs in question provided additional
information on the individual’s previous criminal conviction for
sexual offences, which had resulted in a custodial sentence, their
name being placed on the Sex Offenders Register and a sexual
harm prevention order issuing against them. The individual
argued that the continued availability of this information by Bing
caused discrimination, hindered their employment prospects, and
amounted to a disproportionate interference with their right to
private life given that, under their national law, the sentence had
now been served.

The Right to be Forgotten is
not an absolute right; requests
may be partially declined,
or declined in full, based on
the individual circumstances
relevant to each request. This
case highlights the importance
for controllers to conduct
appropriate balancing tests for
requests of this nature, thereby
enabling them to sufficiently
explain the rationale behind
their decisions to partially
decline or fully decline a
deletion request.

The individual made a search delisting request (in line with Article
17(3) of the GDPR) to Microsoft first. Microsoft removed one URL,
finding its contents less reliable; however, following the application
of a balancing test (an assessment of the individual’s rights when
balanced against the rights and freedoms of others as required
under the GDPR), declined to delist the other two complainedof URLs. Dissatisfied with Microsoft’s response, the individual
submitted a complaint to the DPC.
As part of its investigation, the DPC considered the controller’s
balancing test in light of Articles 17 and 21 of the GDPR and the
relevant EDPB guidance in particular. The DPC noted Microsoft’s
consideration of several factors, including the seriousness of the
offences, the reliability of the source material and the public’s
legitimate interest in accessing information relating to offences,
including those involving risks to minors. The DPC concluded that
Microsoft had appropriately considered the individual’s delisting
request and acted consistently with its obligations under the GDPR.
In its Decision the DPC dismissed the complaint in accordance
with Section 113(2)(a) of the Data Protection Act 2018, as amended
and Article 57(1)(f) of the GDPR respectively, having found no
infringement of the GDPR in this instance.

Decisions and Inquiries

49

Patreon Ireland Ltd: Subject Access Request
and Scope of Controller Responsibility
This case contains two distinct GDPR-related issues, namely an
alleged data breach on a third-party website; and Patreon Ireland
Ltd.’s (Patreon) handling of both an access and erasure request.
Patreon provides a web hosting service to customers. The
complainant in this case alleged a data breach (in line with Chapter
3 of the GDPR) had occurred on a third-party website which was
hosted by Patreon. In addition to the alleged breach, the individual
indicated that they had made an erasure request (in line with Article
17 of the GDPR) to Patreon, seeking to have ‘false information’
about them removed from the same third-party website. During
its examination of the complaint, the DPC considered the alleged
breach and concluded that Patreon was not the Data Controller
for any processing carried out in respect of the third-party website,
as it did not operate it, or determine the purposes and means of
processing undertaken by the third-party website. Additionally, the
individual was asked to provide a date or evidence of the erasure
request made to Patreon. The individual was unable to locate a
copy of the erasure request and, as such, the DPC was not in a
position to consider either aspect of this complaint further.
The individual stated that they had made a Subject Access Request
to Patreon in line with Article 15 of the GDPR. Patreon argued that
the individual’s access request had been unclear and was sent to
the wrong email address. The DPC determined that the individual’s
initial email had constituted a valid access request, noting that
it referenced GDPR rights, and was sent to a legitimate Patreon
support address. The DPC’s Subject Access Requests: A Data
Controller’s Guide makes it clear that data subjects ‘can always
validly lodge an access request by contacting the organisation
through any method of communication be it by phone, post,
informal chat or in person’, and that a data controller, such as
Patreon, ‘may re-direct the data subject to the relevant department
of the organisation dealing with access requests, or may re-direct
the correspondence themselves by internal email or post. However,
the clock for complying with the relevant time limit begins from the
day the request is received by the data controller’.
Ultimately, in its Decision, the DPC found that Patreon had failed
to act on the individual’s Subject Access Request initially and only
responded to their request several months later. The DPC held that
Patreon had infringed Article 12(2) and 12(3) of the GDPR and
issued Patreon with a reprimand.

50

Decisions and Inquiries

KEY TAKEAWAYS:
This case highlights the
importance of controllers
ensuring they do not adopt
an overly narrow view of
what constitutes a valid
access request.
This case also highlights a
controller’s role in ensuring
that appropriate systems are
put in place to identify and
re-route access requests, where
applicable, to the relevant team
within its organisation.
Data Subject Access
Requests FAQ’s

Yahoo EMEA Limited: Transparency
and Account Deletion

KEY TAKEAWAY:

The DPC examined a complaint regarding the deletion of data
associated with a Yahoo email account following a prolonged
period of user inactivity. Having engaged with Yahoo directly and
having been dissatisfied with Yahoo’s response to the queries
they had raised in relation to the deletion of their account and
associated data, the individual brought their complaint to the DPC.

This case highlights the
importance of clear and
proactive communication
being used by controllers
with their service users when
implementing automated
deletion policies affecting
users’ data.

After discovering that emails, including sensitive special category
personal information (such as medical data), had been removed,
the individual sought details about the erasure and queried
why they had not been notified in advance of the deleting of
data associated with their email address. Yahoo explained to
the individual that accounts inactive for over 12 months are
automatically deleted in accordance with the organisation’s then
Terms of Service. Yahoo informed the DPC that this action was
supported by its account activity logs, which confirmed that the
individual in this case had not logged into their email account
for more than a year. Additionally, Yahoo clarified that systemgenerated notifications would have been sent to the user’s Yahoo
address and registered recovery emails, if implemented, prior to
the deletion taking place.
During the DPC’s consideration of this complaint, Yahoo provided
the exact deletion date and acknowledged that it should have given
clearer information to the individual about its approach to erasure
earlier in the process. The DPC considered Yahoo’s compliance
with its transparency obligations under the GDPR, including the
clarity of user information, notification processes, and accessibility
of relevant policies and concluded that Yahoo had failed to comply
with its transparency obligations. While the DPC did find an
infringement in relation to Article 13(2)(a) of the GDPR, the DPC
also noted that Yahoo has subsequently updated its privacy policy
to provide enhanced clarity in relation to the deletion and retention
of its users’ mailboxes. Consequently, in its Decision the DPC
issued a reprimand to Yahoo.

Decisions and Inquiries

51

Cubic Telecom: Misinterpreted Subject Access
Request and Unlawful Erasure
This case concerned a Subject Access Request submitted to
Cubic Telecom following the individual’s attempt to register
with the service. Having complained to Cubic Telecom, the
individual was dissatisfied with the way in which their request
was dealt and brought their complaint to the North RhineWestphalia Data Protection Authority (NRW DPA). NRW DPA
transferred the complaint to the DPC as the Lead Supervisory
Authority (LSA) for Cubic Telecom, in respect of the processing
at issue in the complaint.
During the DPC’s examination of the complaint it was discovered
that, due to a customer support error, the individual’s access
request was incorrectly interpreted as an erasure request after
the individual wrote to Cubic Telecom stating: ‘I’m renouncing
your service…’. Cubic Telecom stated that the initial access request
had been processed by an external support contractor who
misunderstood and misclassified it as an erasure request. As a
result, key personal data relating to the individual, including their
date of birth, contact details, account identifiers and the access
request email they had sent to Cubic Telecom, were deleted.
Cubic Telecom further clarified to the DPC that additional personal
data relating to the individual (such as their name, address and
traffic session data) was also subsequently deleted in line with
Cubic Telecom’s retention policy.
Following the DPC’s intervention, Cubic Telecom provided the
individual with all the remaining personal data it had retained.
Cubic Telecom also implemented measures to ensure the error
would not reoccur. These included introducing additional reviews
for all access and erasure requests going forward and providing
GDPR-related refresher training for support staff.
The DPC found that Cubic Telecom had infringed Article 15 of the
GDPR by both failing to provide the individual with a copy of their
personal data and by mistakenly erasing the individual’s personal
data. The DPC noted that Cubic Telecom had taken steps to try and
reduce the likelihood of this type of human error from happening
again, including the provision of refresher training to its staff. In its
Decision, the DPC issued a reprimand to Cubic Telecom in respect
of this complaint.

52

Decisions and Inquiries

KEY TAKEAWAY:
This case highlights the
importance providing
adequate training for staff and
external support contractors
in key, customer-facing roles,
to ensure that data subject
rights requests are correctly
identified and actioned in a
timely manner.

Meta Platforms Ireland Limited: Subject Access
Request and Article 15(4) of the GDPR
This complaint concerned an individual who was unable to
access their Facebook account after Meta disabled it for what it
determined to be a serious breach of its Terms of Service. The
individual submitted a Subject Access Request looking for all of
their saved personal data, including their Messenger contacts and
phone numbers. Meta initially provided the individual with access
to most of their personal data via a ‘burner link.’ However, Meta
decided to withhold certain information, relying on Article 15(4)
of the GDPR, advising that the disclosure of the withheld personal
data, could potentially adversely affect the rights and freedoms
of others. The individual, unhappy with Meta’s decision, lodged a
complaint with the DPC.

KEY TAKEAWAY:
This case highlights the
competing considerations
which must be taken into
account when applying an
Article 15(4) of the GDPR
balancing test. This case is a
good example of a controller
being able to explain and
provide documentary evidence
in support of its decision not
to release certain categories
of personal data.

During the DPC’s examination of this complaint, Meta detailed
its investigation of this account, the basis for the disablement
of the relevant account, and its reliance on Article 15(4) of the
GDPR for withholding specific categories of data, including the
reported violating content, details of reporters, and account
review information.
Having considered Meta’s balancing test and the supporting
evidence, the DPC determined that, in this particular case, Meta
had undertaken the appropriate steps in an attempt to balance
the individual’s right of access to their personal data against the
fundamental rights of others, in accordance with the principal
of proportionality. The DPC was satisfied that, in this instance,
Meta had sufficiently demonstrated its reliance on Article 15(4) of
the GDPR for restricting the individual’s right of access. The DPC
decided that Meta had complied with its obligations in responding
to the individual’s access request in this instance
and no infringement was found.

Decisions and Inquiries

53

Microsoft Ireland Operations Limited: Subject
Access Request
This Inquiry concerned a complaint regarding Microsoft’s handling
of a Subject Access Request and its refusal to provide the
individual with a copy of their personal data following their account
suspension due to an alleged violation of Microsoft’s Services
Agreement. The individual’s Microsoft OneDrive account was
subsequently terminated after the access request was made
and all of the individual’s data was deleted.
Microsoft sought to rely on Article 15(4) of the GDPR in refusing
to provide the individual with their personal data, stating that
to do so would ‘adversely affect the rights and freedoms of others’.
The scope of the Inquiry examined Microsoft’s handling of the
access request under Articles 12(4), 15(4) and 5(1)(a) of the GDPR.
The Inquiry examined Microsoft’s justification for refusing the
access request, and whether it provided the individual with the
necessary information contained in Article 12(4) of the GDPR,
i.e. whether it gave the individual reasons for refusing access
and informed them of their right to lodge a complaint with a
supervisory authority and to seek a judicial review without undue
delay. The Inquiry also examined whether Microsoft complied
with the principles of lawfulness, fairness and transparency under
Article 5(1)(a) of the GDPR in deleting the individual’s personal data
after the access request was made.
The Inquiry established that Microsoft’s policies were unclear
as regards: the procedures that apply to locked, suspended,
closed and deleted accounts; when precisely account data would
be deleted following account closure; and what, if any, appeal
options are available to users whose accounts have been closed
by Microsoft for an alleged violation of the Microsoft Services
Agreement. Microsoft erased the individual’s OneDrive account
data, despite not clearly informing the individual that their account
had been terminated.
The DPC ultimately established a lack of clarity and transparency
to the individual in Microsoft’s handling of the access request and
in the subsequent deletion of the individual’s data. The DPC was
satisfied that erasure of the individual’s data took place despite a
lack of clarity and transparency about whether the account was
closed and the data scheduled for deletion, and in circumstances
where Microsoft had failed to provide all of the required information
in response to a Subject Access Request. The deletion of the account
data therefore did not comply with the lawfulness, fairness and
transparency required under Article 5(1)(a) of the GDPR.

54

Decisions and Inquiries

The DPC found in its Decision two infringements under Articles
12(4) and 5(1)(a) of the GDPR. Specifically, Microsoft had failed
to inform the individual of the possibility to lodge a complaint
with a supervisory authority and to seek a judicial remedy
following their access request infringing Article 12(4) of the GDPR.
Microsoft infringed Article 5(1)(a) of the GDPR in its handling of the
complainant’s access request and in its decision to delete their data
after receipt of the access request. The DPC issued a reprimand
in respect of the two infringements identified in accordance with
its powers under Article 58(2)(b) of the GDPR.

KEY TAKEAWAY:
This case highlights the
necessity to provide clarity to
users in policy documentation
as regards what happens
to user account data when
their account is suspended or
terminated by the controller.

The Decision also ordered Microsoft to revise its policies and
procedures to bring its processing into compliance, particularly:
to clarify its retention policies for accounts terminated by Microsoft
due to an infringement of the Microsoft Services Agreement; to
clarify in what circumstances such data is permanently deleted;
and to outline how users can appeal such an account termination.
Before finalising this Decision, in accordance with the co-operation
mechanism provided by Article 60 of the GDPR, the DPC received
a relevant and reasoned objection from a Concerned Supervisory
Authority (CSA). The DPC worked with the CSA in question to reach
consensus on a revised Draft Decision which was resubmitted and
accepted by all the supervisory authorities concerned.

Decisions and Inquiries

55

Enforcement of Corrective Powers
Exercised by the DPC
Sligo County Council
In September 2025, the DPC concluded its enforcement process following a Final
Decision adopted by the DPC in November 2024. That Decision concerned an Inquiry
into Sligo County Council’s (the Council) processing of personal data through the
use of CCTV and Automated Number Plate Recognition systems, and any other
technologies that may be used to monitor individuals.
The Inquiry sought to assess whether the processing of personal data by the Council
was in compliance with the GDPR and the Data Protection Act 2018. The DPC found
that the Council had infringed Articles 5(1)(a), 5(1)(c), 5(1)(e), 5(1)(f), 13, 24(1), 25, 30
and 32(1) of the GDPR along with sections 71(1)(a), 71(1)(c), 71(1)(e), 71(1)(f), 71(10),
72, 72(1), 72(2), 75(1), 75(3) 76(2), 78, 79, 81, 82(2), 84 and 90(1) of the 2018 Act.
The corrective measures exercised by the DPC included:
•

a temporary ban on the processing of personal data through CCTV cameras and
ANPR cameras at a number of locations until a valid legal basis could be identified;

•

an order to Sligo County Council to bring its processing of personal data into
compliance taking certain actions specified in the Decision;

•

a reprimand in respect of Sligo County Council’s infringement of section 79 of the
Data Protection Act 2018; and

•

an administrative fine of €29,500.

The DPC carried out an on-site inspection on 16 June 2025 to ensure compliance
with the Decision. The inspection included meetings with council officials at County
Hall as well visits to the Council’s CCTV sites and control rooms in Cranmore and
Sligo Harbour. The inspection team noted various positive changes carried out by
the Council including the digital mapping of CCTV cameras, erected signage and the
implementation of enhanced security measures in CCTV control rooms.
The DPC engaged further with the Council following the inspection and thereafter
confirmed that the Council had brought its processing into compliance with the GDPR
and Data Protection Act 2018 in respect of the issues that were the subject of the
DPC’s Inquiry.

56

Decisions and Inquiries

Maynooth University
In April 2025, the DPC concluded its enforcement process following a Final Decision
adopted by the DPC in November 2024. That Decision concerned an Inquiry
regarding Maynooth University. The Inquiry related to a personal data breach
notified by Maynooth University in November 2018. The breach affected the email
accounts of a number of university employees.
The DPC assessed Maynooth University’s technical and organisational measures for
ensuring the security of personal data that it processed, and examined compliance
with the controller’s obligation to notify breaches promptly. The DPC found that
Maynooth University had infringed Articles 5(1)(f), 32 and 33 of the GDPR. The DPC
reprimanded Maynooth University, imposed administrative fines totalling €40,000
and ordered Maynooth University to bring its processing into compliance with the
security requirements of the GDPR.
In January 2025, Maynooth University submitted a report to the DPC detailing
revised technical and organisational measures for security, training for staff and
students, and ensuring compliance with GDPR requirements. The measures include
the use of Multi-Factor Authentication, a review of anti-malware measures and
policies, security updates for software and changes to password policies. The
DPC analysed Maynooth University’s updated security measures and found that
Maynooth University had complied with the DPC’s order.

Decisions and Inquiries

57

6.
Litigation

6. Litigation
Judgments Delivered and Final Orders made in 2025

No. 1
Record No.
[2023] 341 JR
Title
European Center for Digital
Rights (NOYB) v Data
Protection Commission
Type of action and venue
Judicial Review – High Court
Date of Judgment/Order
16 January 2025

Outcome:
By Order made on consent on 16 January 2025, the High Court
struck out NOYB’s judicial review, NOYB having agreed to withdraw
the proceedings rather than pursuing them through to trial.
In the proceedings, NOYB had challenged the DPC’s alleged
failure to investigate a series of additional ‘discrete issues’ said
to arise in connection with three complaints previously made by
NOYB against Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp respectively,
and in respect of which the DPC had already adopted Decisions
containing findings adverse to those controllers.
The proceedings were fully opposed by the DPC on all grounds.
By agreement, the Court also directed NOYB to make
a contribution to the DPC’s costs in a fixed amount.

Current Status
Proceedings concluded

Litigation

59

No. 2
Record No.
General Court Record Nos.
T-70/23,
T-84/23,
T-111/23
Title
Data Protection Commission
v European Data Protection
Board
Type of action and venue
Appeal – EU General Court
Date of Judgment/Order
29 January 2025
Current Status
Proceedings concluded

Outcome:
By judgment delivered on 29 January 2025, the General Court of
the European Union (CJEU) dismissed an action brought by the
DPC against the European Data Protection Board (EDPB) in Joined
Cases T 70/23, T 84/23 and T 111/23.
The proceedings concerned the DPC’s challenge to one subelement of a suite of Decisions adopted by the EDPB on 5
December 2022 in respect of certain complaints lodged from
NOYB. In the Decisions in question, the EDPB had directed the
DPC to carry out fresh investigations in respect of the processing
of special categories of personal data by the controllers of the
Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp platforms in particular
contexts. (The DPC had earlier found that, contrary to Article 6
of the GDPR, the controllers in question were processing ‘nonspecial category data’ for behavioural advertising purposes
without a legal basis).
In the proceedings before the General Court, the DPC argued
that the EDPB had exceeded its authority under Article 65(1)(a) of
the GDPR, contending that binding Decisions of the EDPB cannot
require the investigation of additional issues or the delivery of
draft Decisions in respect of such issues.
The Court disagreed, holding that a ‘relevant and reasoned
objection’ under Article 4(24) of the GDPR may address the scope
of an investigation, thereby authorising the EDPB, when adopting
a binding Decision under Article 65(1)(a) of the GDPR, to direct a
Lead Supervisory Authority to extend the scope of its investigation
and associated analyses and, if necessary, to conduct fresh
investigations and deliver a follow-on draft Decision to the Article
60 cooperation procedure. The Court also elaborated on the
operation of the cooperation and consistency mechanism under
Chapter VII of the GDPR.
The DPC’s complaint was therefore dismissed. Costs were also
awarded against the DPC.

60

Litigation

No. 3
Record No.
[2024] 3881
Title
Mullan & Mullan v Data
Protection Commission
Type of action and venue
Statutory Appeal –
Circuit Court
Date of Judgment/Order
26 February 2025
Current Status
Proceedings discontinued

Outcome:
On 26 February 2025, the Circuit Court made an Order recording
the fact that an appeal brought by the plaintiffs against a Decision
of the DPC made on 16 August 2024 had been discontinued.
The Decision under appeal was concerned with two related
complaints investigated by the DPC under the pre-GDPR regime
relating to the processing of the Appellants’ personal data during
a receivership.
The DPC’s Decision contained eight formal findings, upholding
certain elements of the complaints but rejecting others. Notably,
the DPC found that the controller had failed to provide information
it was obliged to provide to the data subjects under section 2D
of the Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003 and had unlawfully
disclosed personal data in 2015. Separately, it found that the
controller had a lawful basis for obtaining and processing the
Appellants’ data for the purposes of the receivership.
Papers were filed by the DPC in opposition to the appeal on 15
January 2025. Before the proceedings next came before the Court
on 26 February 2025, it became clear that the Appellants no longer
intended to pursue their appeal. On that date, the proceedings
were duly marked as having been discontinued.

Litigation

61

No. 4
Record No.
[2022] 699 JR
Title
McShane v Data Protection
Commission (and HSE)
Type of action and venue
Judicial Review – High Court
Date of Judgment/Order
3 April 2025
Current Status
Proceedings concluded

Outcome:
On 3 April 2025, the High Court (O’Donnell, J.) refused an
application for judicial review brought by Mr McShane, challenging
a Decision of the DPC made on 23 May 2022, in respect of a
complaint made by Mr McShane further to the May 2021 cyberattack on the HSE.
In its decision, the DPC determined that the HSE was not a ‘data
controller’ for any non-work personal data stored on a work phone
issued by the HSE to its employee, Mr McShane. Accordingly, it had
dismissed the complaint.
In his proceedings, Mr McShane alleged (amongst other things)
that, in its examination of his complaint, the DPC had misapplied
the GDPR.
In its judgment, the Court held that the DPC acted lawfully and
proportionately in its handling of the complaint as presented,
which focused on non-work-related personal data said to have
been held on Mr McShane’s work phone. The Court accepted the
DPC’s view that the HSE was not to be treated as a controller of
that data because it did not determine the purposes and means of
the data processing. The Court rejected arguments that the DPC
was obliged to conduct a broader Inquiry into the HSE’s processing
of Mr McShane’s work-related data, noting that such issues were
outside the scope of the complaint. The application for judicial
review was therefore dismissed.
On 3 June 2025, the Court directed Mr McShane to pay the DPC’s
costs (and those of the HSE) from the date leave was granted (3
November 2023).
Mr McShane subsequently appealed the High Court’s Judgment
and Orders to the Court of Appeal.

62

Litigation

No. 5
Record No.
[2025] IECA 97
Title
Meta Platforms Ireland Limited
v Data Protection Commission
Type of action and venue
Appeal from High Court –
Court of Appeal
Date of Judgment/Order
12 May 2025
Current Status
Proceedings concluded

Outcome:
On 12 May 2025, the Court of Appeal found in favour of the DPC,
in an appeal brought by the DPC against an earlier Judgment (and
related Orders) of the High Court.
In its earlier application, Meta Platforms Ireland Limited had asked
the Court to adjourn and/or stay Meta’s appeal against a particular
Decision of the DPC (in which the DPC had made findings against
Meta), pending the determination of other, unrelated proceedings
presently pending before the CJEU (WhatsApp, Case T 709/21).
The DPC opposed that application, contending that the appeal
should proceed to hearing, whether in whole or in part.
The High Court had granted the general adjournment sought by
Meta. The DPC duly appealed.
In its judgment of 12 May 2025, the Court of Appeal set aside the
High Court’s judgment, noting that:
•

the discretion to stay proceedings must be exercised sparingly
and only where necessary to avoid injustice;

•

Meta had not demonstrated that continuation of the Irish
proceedings would cause prejudice or duplication that could
not be managed by case management measures; and

•

the existence of related EU proceedings did not justify a blanket
stay, particularly where the issues were not identical and the
DPC’s statutory functions would be impeded.

On costs, the Court ruled that the DPC was entirely successful in
defending the applications before it and so was entitled to recover
its costs in both the High Court and the Court of Appeal.

Litigation

63

No. 6
Record No.
[2025] IECA 195
Title
Nowak v Data Protection
Commissioner
Type of action and venue
Appeal from High Court –
Court of Appeal
Date of Judgment/Order
19 September 2025
Current Status
Proceedings concluded
subject to the Supreme Court’s
consideration of an application
for leave to bring a further
appeal to that court

Outcome:
On 19 September 2025, the Court of Appeal (Faherty, A. and
Meenan, JJ.) delivered judgment dismissing Mr Nowak’s appeal
against a Judgment and Order of the High Court, in which the
High Court had in turn upheld the Circuit Court’s dismissal of
Mr Nowak’s appeal against a Decision of the DPC made on
21 April 2022.
The DPC’s Decision of 21 April 2022 originated in a complaint
made by Mr Nowak to the DPC in 2010 in which he alleged that
Chartered Accountants Ireland had wrongly refused access to
certain of Mr Nowak’s examination scripts, in response to a data
subject access request made by Mr Nowak.
While, following a ruling of the CJEU in Case C 434/16, Mr Nowak
had long-since secured access to his examination script, Mr Nowak
later alleged that the DPC had failed to address five other issues
said to arise from his original complaint.
In its decision of 21 April 2022, the DPC examined the five issues
in question, ruling against Mr Nowak on each one.
Appeals by Mr Nowak against that Decision were rejected by
the Circuit Court (on 9 October 2023) and the High Court (on
2 July 2024).
The Court of Appeal rejected Mr Nowak’s further appeal to that
Court, upholding the DPC’s analysis of all five of the follow-on
issues raised by Mr Nowak.
By further Order dated 28 October 2025, the Court directed
Mr Nowak to pay the DPC’s costs of the appeal, to be adjudicated
in default of agreement.
Mr Nowak subsequently applied for leave to bring a further
appeal to the Supreme Court, which application was pending
at year’s end.

64

Litigation

No. 7
Record No.
[2024] 533 MCA and [2025] 6
MCA
Title
Meta Platforms Ireland Limited
v Data Protection Commission
Type of action and venue
Statutory Appeal – High Court
Date of Judgment/Order
31 October 2025
Current Status
Proceedings ongoing in
relation to costs

Outcome:
By Consent Order made on 25 June 2025 in an (unrelated) appeal
brought by LinkedIn Ireland Unlimited Company against a Decision
of the DPC, the High Court directed that four identified issues
should be determined prior to any hearing of LinkedIn’s underlying
or substantive appeal. (In essence, those issues are concerned
with identifying the nature/type of appeal that may be brought by
a controller against a decision of the DPC in a case where the DPC
has found that the controller has infringed one or more identified
provisions of the GDPR and has imposed an administrative fine in
respect of such infringements.)
On 31 October 2025, the High Court (Cahill, J.) delivered an extempore judgment refusing Meta’s application for a trial of the
same four preliminary issues in the context of two separate
appeals brought by Meta Platforms Ireland Limited against
Decisions of the DPC.
In the context of its application, Meta argued (amongst other
things) that, for reasons of fairness and proportionality, Meta
should be heard in relation to LinkedIn’s preliminary issues, either
at the same time as those issues were being considered in the
context of LinkedIn’s proceedings, or immediately thereafter.
The DPC (and the State) opposed Meta’s application, contending
that, in the usual way, Meta had no entitlement to be heard in
another party’s proceedings; accordingly, it should simply await
the outcome of the trial of LinkedIn’s preliminary issues. The Court
also accepted that a trial of the same preliminary issues in the
context of Meta’s appeal would give rise to duplication and would
therefore impose an undue burden on the Court and the parties.
For these and other reasons, the Court refused Meta’s application.
Issues in relation to the costs of the application had not yet been
decided by year’s end.

Litigation

65

No. 8
Record No.
[2025] IEHC 619
Title
TikTok Technology Limited
and TikTok Information
Technologies UK Limited v
Data Protection Commission
Type of action and venue
Statutory Appeal – High Court
Date of Judgment/Order
13 November 2025
Current Status
Interim stay granted;
appeal pending

Outcome:
On 30 April 2025, the DPC adopted a final Decision in which
it made certain findings adverse to TikTok in relation to data
transfers to China. Amongst other things, those findings
related to the processing of TikTok’s EEA users’ data in China in
circumstances where, although stored on servers located in other
countries, the data is remotely accessed from (and is processed
in) China. Such access is facilitated by means of a ‘remote access
solution’ implemented by or on behalf of TikTok and which is said
to feature a suite of technical and other controls.
On foot of its findings of infringement, the DPC made an
Order requiring TikTok to bring its processing of such data into
compliance within a period of six months (‘the Corrective Order’).
It also directed TikTok to suspend its transfers of EEA user data
to China in the event that compliance was not achieved within
that six-month period (‘the Suspension Order’).
Separately, the DPC imposed administrative fines in the aggregate
amount of €530 million.
TikTok appealed against the DPC’s Decision. In circumstances
where that appeal would not come on for hearing for some time,
TikTok separately brought an application to stay the coming into
effect of the Suspension Order and the Corrective Order pending
the outcome of the appeal. In the context of that application,
it contended (amongst other things) that compliance with the
Suspension and Corrective Orders would require it to take
irreversible steps, including relocating thousands of staff, incurring
billions of dollars in costs and degrading service quality for its users.
The DPC opposed TikTok’s application for a stay, citing, amongst
other things, risks to the fundamental rights of TikTok’s EEA userbase if transfers of data to China were not brought to a halt within
the timeframe identified in the DPC’s decision.
Following a hearing conducted over four days in early October
2025, the High Court (Mulcahy, J.) delivered judgment on 13
November 2025. The Court acceded to TikTok’s application,
suspending the coming into effect of the Suspension and
Corrective Orders subject to certain conditions. Specifically, the
Court directed that additional information be communicated by
TikTok to its EEA user-base in relation to the transfer of their data
to China; the Court also directed TikTok to undertake to take all
reasonable steps to ensure that its underlying appeal against the
DPC’s Decision would be heard as soon as practicable.
TikTok were awarded their costs of the stay application. The DPC
appealed against the Judgement and Order of the High Court.
By determination delivered on 23 December 2025, the Supreme
Court granted leave for the hearing of an appeal by that Court
(as opposed to the Court of Appeal).

66

Litigation

No. 9
Record No.
[2024] 1279
Title
Dáil Éireann & Ors v Data
Protection Commission
Type of action and venue
Statutory Appeal –
Circuit Court
Date of Judgment/Order
25 November 2025
Current Status
Proceedings concluded

Outcome:
Statutory appeal brought under Section 150 of the Data Protection
Act 2018 against an Enforcement Notice issued by the DPC on 16
February 2024. That Notice directed the Houses of the Oireachtas
to comply with a Subject Access request submitted by an identified
data subject in July 2018. (The Oireachtas had declined to engage
with the access request in question on the basis of its view that
any processing of personal data by the Oireachtas fell outside the
scope of EU law and/or the exercise by the data subject of their
right of access was restricted by Sections 60 and/or section 43
of the 2018 Act.)
Subsequent to the bringing of its appeal, and reflecting certain
developments under EU law, the Houses of the Oireachtas took
steps to deal with the access request in issue on its merits.
On the basis of the parties’ shared view that this rendered the
Enforcement Notice moot, the Oireachtas agreed to discontinue
its appeal. An Order was duly made by the Circuit Court to that
effect on 25 November 2025.
The Court made no Order as to costs.

Litigation

67

No. 10
Record No.
[2024] 580 MCA
Title
LinkedIn Ireland Unlimited
Company v Data Protection
Commission
Type of action and venue
Statutory Appeal – High Court
Date of Judgment/Order
2 December 2025
Current Status
Judgment pending

Outcome:
Statutory appeal under sections 142 and 150 of the Data
Protection Act 2018 against the DPC’s Decision of 22 October
2024. In that Decision, the DPC found infringements by LinkedIn
of Articles 5(1)(a), 6(1)(a), 6(1)(b), 6(1)(f), 13(1)(c), 14(1)(c) of the
GDPR in connection with its processing of platform users’ personal
data for behavioural analysis and targeted advertising purposes.
As one element of its analysis, the DPC concluded that LinkedIn
could not validly rely on the ‘consent’, ‘contractual necessity’ or
‘legitimate interests’ legal bases for the processing operations
under examination.
On foot of these findings of infringement, the DPC went on to
make an Order requiring LinkedIn to bring its processing into
compliance and to amend its privacy policy. It also imposed
administrative fines in the aggregate amount of €310 million.
LinkedIn brought an appeal against all aspects of the DPC’s
decision on 18 November 2024.
On 25 June 2025, the High Court (Gearty, J.) directed, with the
consent of the parties, that four discrete issues arising in the
appeal should be determined before the appeal proper is
brought on for hearing. The preliminary issues in question
include the following:
•

whether, in a case where a decision of the DPC imposes an
administrative fine, the entirety of any appeal against that
Decision can be brought under Section 142 of the 2018 Act,
or whether that section is limited to dealing solely with the
administrative fine element of the DPC’s decision, with other
points of appeal to be addressed under Section 150 of the
2018 Act;

•

the standard/scope of review applicable under each of Sections
142 and 150 of the 2018 Act; and

•

whether, for the purposes of any appeal, the Court may admit
new evidence and arguments that had not been raised before
the DPC.

A trial of these preliminary issues was conducted over three days
commencing on 2 December 2025. (The Attorney General was
joined to the hearing of the application given the constitutional
and EU law dimensions raised).
The Court had reserved its Judgment by year-end.

68

Litigation

No. 11
Record No.
[2025] 5323
Title
City of Dublin Education
and Training Board v Data
Protection Commission
Type of action and venue
Application for Confirmation
of Administrative Fine – Circuit
Court
Date of Judgment/Order
16 December 2025
Current Status
Concluded

Outcome:
Application by the DPC under section 143(1) of the Data
Protection Act 2018 for an Order confirming its Decision of
18 June 2025 to impose certain administrative fines on the
Respondent following an Inquiry into a personal data breach
notified on 16 November 2018.
In its Decision, the DPC found infringements of Articles 5(1)(f),
32(1), 32(2), 33(1), 34(1) and 34(4) of the GDPR, including a failure
to implement appropriate security measures, a failure to notify
the breach without undue delay, and a failure to communicate
the breach to affected data subjects when directed.
As well as issuing a reprimand under Article 58(2)(b) of the GDPR,
and an Order directing the controller to bring its processing into
compliance under Article 58(2)(d) of the GDPR, the DPC imposed
administrative fines on the controller totalling €125,000.
Under section 143(1), the DPC is required to apply to the Court
for confirmation of its decision to impose an administrative
fine. In the present case, that application was heard by the
Circuit Court (unopposed) on 16 December 2025. The Court duly
confirmed the fines imposed by the DPC and awarded the DPC
its costs of the application.

Litigation

69

7.

Supervision

7. Supervision
Proactive engagement with the data controllers and processors
regulated by the DPC provides opportunities to advocate for the
protection of individuals’ data rights and to prevent potential
infringements before they occur. Interacting with organisations
through consultative engagement and supervisory interventions
leads to better outcomes for individuals and the public as a whole.
This proactive, preventative approach is a central element of the
DPC’s regulatory toolkit.
Alongside supporting organisational data
protection compliance, proactive engagement
allows the DPC to identify concerns early and
recommend mitigating or remedial actions prior
to the commencement of data processing. This
approach also allows the DPC to take appropriate
action where engagement indicates that an
organisation may be infringing, or be likely to
infringe, data protection law. This ensures that
regulatory resources are directed where they can
have the greatest impact, delivering better results
for all stakeholders.
This engaged approach to supervision and
consultation implements the DPC’s functions
under the GDPR to raise the awareness of
controllers and processors of their data
protection obligations, and also to monitor
relevant technological, commercial, and
other developments insofar as they have an
impact on the protection of personal data. In
a rapidly changing technological environment,
it is incumbent on the DPC to keep pace with
innovation. Direct engagement with stakeholders
is an important part of this.

Through constructive supervisory and
consultative engagement, the DPC can
understand how organisations process personal
data and fulfil their responsibilities as data
controllers. By building open, and communicative
relationships with stakeholders, the DPC can
work to strengthen compliance, accountability,
and a culture of data protection awareness in all
sectors. In 2025, the DPC was able to dedicate
additional resources to sectoral outreach and
engagement, developing new relationships and
reaching out to stakeholders in innovative ways.
In 2026, the DPC aims to continue in this manner,
and to continue to improve data protection
compliance by providing support and guidance
to organisations.

Supervision

71

The DPC had 1,222 supervision
engagements during 2025.
The sectoral breakdown is as follows:

Law Enforcement

80

Health

123

Public Sector

Charities/Voluntary
Bodies

Children/Family

Private Sector &
Financial

Multinational
Technology

Total

191

498

41

162
127

1,222

In addition, across all sectors the DPC engaged
in 280 supervision meetings with organisations
in 2025. It can be observed from the above
that a significant amount of DPC engagement
is with the multinational technology sector.
This proactive engagement involves regular
consultation, engagement and follow-up, both
with the controllers involved and the DPC’s peer
regulators, with the aim of ensuring regulatory
consistency across the European Union.

Of the 498 Multinational Technology Supervision
engagements, 352 were directly related to tech
companies.

152 (43%) were reactive
(i.e multinational tech companies
reaching out to the DPC

200 (57%) were proactive
(i.e. the DPC actively
contacting the data controller)

72

Supervision

Legislative Consultation
A key statutory function of the DPC is prior
consultation on legislative measures that
relate to data processing. Both the GDPR and
Data Protection Act 2018 require government
departments to consult the DPC on any legislative
or regulatory measures (such as a statutory Code
of Practice) that will involve data processing. The
scope of this obligation is broad, as it applies to
all legislation affecting the processing of personal
data. However, it is particularly important where
legislation aims to introduce a new legal basis for
the processing of personal data by public bodies
or to restrict the rights of individuals under data
protection law.
Where legislation aims to provide a new legal
basis for processing personal data, it must meet
the requirements that are set out in the GDPR.
It must be shown that the data processing
is necessary to achieve a clearly articulated
objective in the public interest, and will not
have a disproportionate impact upon affected
persons. Furthermore, the legislative measure
should be clear and precise in setting out
how personal data will be processed, leading
to a foreseeable outcome for individuals. If
legislation aims to provide a legal basis for
processing special categories of personal
data, in addition to the general requirements,
it must also provide for suitable and specific
measures to safeguard the fundamental rights
and the interests of the data subject. Should a
legislative measure aim to restrict the rights of
data subjects, the DPC advises drafters on how
to meet the requirements of Article 23 of the
GDPR to ensure that any restriction is necessary
and proportionate in safeguarding a clear
public interest and respects the essence of the
fundamental rights and freedoms in question.

In 2025, the DPC provided guidance and
observations on 77 proposed legislative and
regulatory measures including:
•

Roads 1993 Act, as amended by the 2023 Act
(Road Traffic Collision Data Sharing);

•

European Single Access Point Omnibus
Directive, amending IORP II Directive
(2016/2341);

•

European Union (Internal Market in Electricity)
(No. 2) Regulations 2022 Statutory Instrument
No. 37 of 2022 (S.I.37/2022) - Smart Meter
Access Codes;

•

CRMS 2268/2025 FB25 Amendment Section
851A Taxes Consolidation Act (De Minimis
Regulation);

•

Automatic Enrolment Retirement Savings
System Regulations 2025;

•

Health (Amendment) (Home Support
Providers) Bill 2025;

•

Construction Safety Licensing Bill 2023;

•

Road Transport (Operator’s Licence
Application) (Amendment) Regulations 2024;

•

Apartments and Duplex Defects Remediation
Bill 2025;

•

Planning and Development (Strategic
Environmental Assessment) Regulations 2025;
and

•

Proceeds of Crime (Amendment) Bill.

In addition to consultation on primary and
secondary legislation, the DPC also engages
with stakeholders on Codes of Practice governing
the processing of personal data, and ancillary
documentation such as data protection impact
assessments. This assists in ensuring that data
will be processed lawfully by public bodies when
new legislation becomes operative.

Supervision

73

Public Service Transformation
and Engagement
Throughout 2025, the DPC actively engaged with
a range of public sector bodies and government
departments across several major projects and
working groups. This included engagement on
the planned publication of the 1926 Census by
the National Archives, to ensure that the data
protection rights of centenarians included in the
Census were adequately addressed. The DPC
also participated in an advisory capacity to the
Public Sector Data Strategy Working Group of the
Department of Public Expenditure, Infrastructure,
Public Service Reform and Digitalisation. The
Strategy aims to enhance quality, accessibility,
and efficiency of public services for citizens.
The DPC welcomes the opportunity to contribute
expertise in these projects, and to assist in
ensuring data protection considerations are
at the forefront.
Across these engagements, the DPC provided
guidance on embedding data protection by
design and default, and ensuring that safeguards
are in place to protect data subjects. The DPC will
continue to collaborate with public sector bodies
to ensure that data protection remains at the core
of projects, while promoting the development and
delivery of improved public services.

Company Law Review Group and
Publication of Personal Data
In May 2025, the DPC was invited by the Company
Law Review Group (CLRG) to attend its Corporate
Governance Meeting (CGM) to discuss the
publication of residential addresses of company
directors as prescribed by the Companies Act
2014. The CLRG invited the DPC for the purposes
of providing advice on the data protection
implications arising from this matter.
While the Companies Act 2014 creates a legal
obligation for the Companies Registration Office
(CRO) to process the personal data of company
directors by publishing their residential address
on a public register, questions have arisen as to
whether this processing meets the requirements
of data protection law to be necessary and
proportionate to achieve a purpose in the
public interest.

74

Supervision

As part of its consideration, the DPC examined
whether the safeguards, provided under section
150(11) of the Companies Act 2014, which allows
a director to apply for the removal of their
residential address from the register on the basis
of risk, (significant threat to their personal safety)
are effective in their application.
The DPC’s advice to the CLRG focussed on
ensuring that the legal obligation to publish
personal data should be assessed in relation to
its necessity and proportionality in ensuring
transparency in relation to the directorship of
companies, and that any safeguards should
be assessed for their genuine effectiveness in
addressing the risks identified arising from the
publication of personal data.
In September 2025, the CLRG issued a report
which adopted the views outlined by the DPC at
the CGM and recommended that the legislation
be amended to preclude availability of residential
addresses on the CRO register.
This engagement reflects the DPC’s approach
to the topic of the publication of personal
data by public bodies in general, where it is
important that the public interest in openness
and transparency is adequately balanced with
the fundamental rights of individuals, and their
legitimate concerns regarding public access to
their personal data.

From left to right: Commissioner Des Hogan, Assistant Commissioner Clare Barry, Tim Hanly National Safeguarding Office,
HSE, Babiana Savin CEO Sage Advocacy and Deputy Commissioner David Murphy at the launch of the DPC’s Adult Safeguarding
Toolkit, July 2025.

Adult Safeguarding Toolkit
In 2025, the DPC continued to prioritise
the protection of vulnerable adults in line
with its Regulatory Strategy 2022-2027. A key
milestone was the publication of the Adult
Safeguarding Toolkit in July 2025. Developed
following extensive cross team collaboration
and engagement with relevant stakeholders
(including advocacy groups, service providers
across the public, private and voluntary sectors,
alongside other relevant regulatory bodies), the
Toolkit provides practical guidance on different
aspects of data protection law in the specific
context of Adult Safeguarding. It provides FAQs
addressing common queries received by the DPC
from the health sector, and resources to support
organisations working with at-risk adults.

To support the launch, the DPC hosted a
stakeholder event in its Pembroke Row offices
attended by over 120 representatives across
healthcare providers, social care organisations,
legal, professional, advocacy bodies and media
representatives.
Following publication of the Toolkit, the DPC
undertook a number of outreach events to
assist organisations in applying the guidance in
practice. These included presentations delivered
to social workers in the Cork and Kerry region, as
well as delivering workshops at the HSE’s National
Learning and Development Seminar in Galway.
The DPC also met with Nursing Homes Ireland
and the Decision Support Service to explore
areas for future collaboration in 2026 on adult
safeguarding matters.

Adult Safeguarding
Toolkit

Supervision

75

Sports Sector Engagement
Following on from 2024’s work with the sports
sector and in line with Goal 4 of the Regulatory
Strategy 2022-2027, the DPC continued to
strengthen its engagement and support for
organisations across the sporting landscape.
Building on positive momentum generated in
2024, the DPC established a dedicated focus
group comprising 20 National Governing Bodies
(NGBs) and Local Sports Partnerships (LSPs).
Throughout the year, the group met on several
occasions to discuss emerging challenges, reallife issues facing sports bodies, and practical
ways in which the DPC can assist.
In direct response to feedback from the focus
group, the DPC hosted the Kick Start Compliance:
Data Protection in Sport all island conference
on the 28th of November in Croke Park – the
first event of its kind delivered by the DPC,
and with contributions from the Information
Commissioner’s Office (ICO) branch in
Northern Ireland. The event brought together
experts from across data protection, sport,
and technology, including former professional

76

Supervision

athletes, offering sessions on practical GDPR
implementations and the deployment of new
technologies. The conference also addressed
the complex area of children’s data processing
and the interplay with safeguarding.
To complement this work, the DPC published
a series of concise, easy-to-use infographics
tailored specifically for the sports sector. These
resources were developed following feedback
from the focus group who emphasised the
need for simple, accessible guidance to help
organisations navigate their data protection
obligations. As part of its ongoing resources for
those working with personal data, the DPC has
made the recordings of the conference available
on its website under the tab ‘For Organisations’.
Recordings of the Kick Start
Compliance Conference
Infographics from the Kick
Start Compliance Conference

From left to right: Anna Morgan (Bird & Bird’s International Privacy and Data Protection Group), Caroline Mooney (ICO), Kelly
Cunningham (GAA), Jenny Dolan (DPC), Colin Gorman (TUSLA) at the Kick Start Compliance Conference, November 2025.

Top Tips for Compliance:
10 things sporting organisations
need to do

1

Know the data you hold
List the personal data you collect (members, parents,
volunteers, medical information, etc.)

2

Know and understand why you have it
Record the reason for each (the legal basis). This could be
for contractual reasons, compliance with a legal obligation,
consent.

3

Tell people what you do with their data
Explain clearly, up front, what data you collect, why you
need it, and how it will be used. This is typically done
through a privacy policy.

4

Considerations for children
Use child-friendly explanations to make the information
accessible to them. Children are their own data subjects,
with their rights.

5

Keep data secure
Use strong passwords, limit access, develop a club-specific
email address, train staff/volunteers, having a club device,
and lock paper files away.

6

Control who you share data with
Only share with trusted third-party providers and ensure
they are secure by doing due diligence ahead of use.

7

Don’t keep data longer than needed
Set simple retention rules and delete or destroy data when
the purpose ends, such as when someone leaves the club.

8

Understand people’s rights
Be able to recognise when someone is making an access or
deletion request and respond appropriately. Don’t ignore it!

9

Be ready for breaches
Have a plan to spot, record, and report breaches quickly.

10

Show your work
Keep records of decision, processes, policies, and training.

From left to right: Dale Sunderland (DPC), David Murphy
(DPC), Ellen Hayes (Sport Ireland), Caroline Mooney (ICO), Des
Hogan (DPC), Kate Colleary (Pembroke Privacy) at the Kick
Start Compliance Conference, November 2025.

Supervision

77

Charities Engagement
In line with Goal 5 of the DPC’s Regulatory
Strategy 2022-2027, which commits to
supporting organisations of all sizes and driving
compliance, the DPC delivered several online
sessions tailored for charities and voluntary
organisations throughout 2025. These sessions
built upon the DPC’s 2024 engagement and
directly addressed the data protection challenges
faced by the not-for-profit sector. Recognising
the unique challenges facing the sector, the
DPC embarked on an extensive engagement
programme to support these vital organisations
in meeting their data protection obligations.
Many of the charities with which the DPC
engaged provide services in the areas of health
and social care, and work with vulnerable and
at-risk service users in a variety of contexts.
This can present additional challenges in terms
of processing special category data for these
organisations.
As part of this commitment, the DPC delivered
seven in-person Let's Talk Data Protection sessions
in partnership with the Charities Institute
Ireland, in different regions of the country. The
DPC also contributed an article to the Charity
Leader, the Charities Institute Ireland’s magazine
for nonprofit leaders, on key data protection
recommendations for charities.
The DPC also engaged with several major
organisations in the charities sector to deliver
bespoke, online presentations for their members.
In May, the DPC delivered a webinar to registered
bodies with the Charities Regulator entitled
titled Data Protection for Charities, and in October
delivered an online session to charities affiliated
with the Carmichael Centre, entitled Navigating
AI and Data Protection.
The online and in-person presentations covered
crucial topics for charities such as data breaches,
requests from law enforcement bodies such as
An Garda Síochána for information on service
users, use of AI, and data subject access requests
from clients.

78

Supervision

Stakeholder engagement in the sector was also
enhanced in 2025 by the participation of DPC
staff in an information stand at The Wheel Summit
2025: Thriving Through Change which took place
in May in Croke Park.
Partnering with organisations such as Carmichael,
The Wheel, and Charities Institute Ireland enables
the DPC to greatly increase both the quality and
quantity of engagement with the charity sector.

Data Protection Toolkit
for Schools
Protecting children’s personal data is one
of the five strategic goals of the DPC’s 20222027 Regulatory Strategy. Acknowledging the
challenges that schools, particularly smaller
schools, face on a day-to-day basis in ensuring
compliance with their data protection
obligations towards children, the DPC
published a new Data Protection Toolkit for
Schools (the Toolkit) resource in late 2024. Given
the importance of the protection of children’s
personal data under the GDPR, this resource was
focused on the processing of student/children’s
personal data within a school environment.
Data Protection Toolkit
for Schools
Following the Toolkit’s publication, the DPC began
the task of promoting the resource within the
education sector throughout 2025, in particular
through collaboration with Education Support
Centre Ireland’s (ESCI) regional centres across
the country. With these centres’ support, the
DPC presented a series of workshops and
information sessions to school leadership,
at both primary and post primary levels,
addressing various topics from the Toolkit.
In addition to its collaboration with the ESCI,
the DPC attended a number of education
sector focused conferences and conventions to
promote awareness of the Toolkit and address
concerns school leadership may have in a more
informal setting.

Schools’ Processing of Personal Data
During Pre-Enrolment
During 2025, the DPC engaged with a number
of primary schools following concerns brought
to the DPC’s attention regarding the collection
of personal data, including special category
data, during the pre-enrolment stage of the
admissions process. These concerns highlighted
issues around the volume and type of data being
requested before any school place had been
offered or accepted.
Through this engagement, the DPC observed
varying practices across schools in relation
to the information requested at the preenrolment stage, including having a valid legal
basis for processing special category data
at this stage. Some schools also referenced
the use of standardised templates within
school administration platforms, which may
inadvertently have led to the inclusion of
fields seeking data that was not necessary or
appropriate at this stage of the admissions
process.
To support schools in meeting their obligations
under the GDPR, and to encourage a more
proportionate approach to data collection during
pre-enrolment, the DPC published a blog post—
Processing Personal Data During Pre-Enrolment:
What Schools Need to Know—on its website in
2025. The blog provides practical guidance on
what information schools should and should
not request at the pre-enrolment stage, outlines
the relevant GDPR principles, and includes key
questions schools can use to assess whether
their data collection practices are necessary,
lawful and transparent.

CCTV and Schools
2025 saw a number of concerns raised regarding
the processing of personal data in schools via
CCTV systems, in particular, where the cameras
were located within the vicinity of bathrooms.
The DPC engaged with numerous schools
regarding these data processing practices.
While the use of CCTV in schools is not prohibited,
it is important for schools to have appropriate
safeguards in place. This includes:
•

conducting a Data Protection Impact
Assessment (DPIA) prior to the deployment
of such technology, to identify and mitigate
any potential risks;

•

having an up-to-date CCTV Data Protection
Policy in place;

•

availing of masking or privacy filter technology
where required;

•

having appropriate signage on display to
inform people CCTV is in operation; and

•

ensuring appropriate security of the data
being processed by way of the CCTV system.

Further guidance on CCTV usage can be found in
the DPC’s Data Protection Toolkit for Schools and
guidance note CCTV Guidance for Controllers.
Data Protection Toolkit
for Schools
CCTV Guidance for
Controllers

Blog: Processing
Personal Data During
Pre-Enrolement: What
Schools Need to Know

Supervision

79

Compliance Sweep of Supermarket
and Convenience Store Sector
Following the initial compliance sweep of the
Irish Retail Sector in 2024 with the objective of
gaining deeper insights into the sector’s personal
data processing activities and compliance levels,
the DPC advanced its supervisory activities in
2025 by engaging directly with supermarket
and convenience store controllers. These
controllers, which have a significant footprint
in data processing across Ireland, included:
•

primary market leaders (holding a combined
66.8% market share4);

•

discount retail operators;

•

convenience and specialised retail networks;
and

•

international retail operations.

The review greatly enhanced the DPC’s
understanding of the sector and its associated
data processing activities. It identified emerging
technological developments and data processing
practices influenced by economic pressures,
highlighting the need for ongoing review to
ensure sustained compliance and the protection
of data subjects’ rights.
The review identified several significant sectoral
data protection developments, including:
•

•

4

80

the recognition, for certain retail brands, that
loyalty applications and websites function
as separate data controllers from their
respective physical retail outlets;
the ongoing deployment and assessment of
technological solutions to reduce economic
losses and enhance staff safety in response
to rising levels of retail crime, including the
increased use of body-worn cameras by
security staff and the deployment of live CCTV
monitoring displays at self-service checkouts
to observe transactions as customers scan
their purchases; and

Grocery Market Share—Worldpanel by Numerator

Supervision

•

the introduction and assessment of
artificial intelligence technologies for
image processing in both store environments
and supply chain operations.

The sector demonstrated significant engagement
with data protection compliance, as evidenced
by completing 835 Subject Access Requests
under Article 15 of the GDPR in the 12 months
preceding engagement and conducting 215 Data
Protection Impact Assessments under Article
35 of the GDPR in the preceding three years.
The review process identified and facilitated
the resolution of several material data protection
compliance deficiencies across the sector,
thereby advancing controllers' adherence to
their obligations under the GDPR.
For example, a Data Controller submitted a Record
of Processing Activities, as part of its questionnaire
response, that did not comply with Article 30(1)
(c) and (d) of the GDPR, as it was based on a UK
template and did not adequately reflect processing
operations specific to Ireland. In another matter,
a Controller's Privacy Policy did not meet the
requirements of Article 13 of the GDPR as it
failed to provide all of the required information
to individuals. Furthermore, in some instances
controllers did not initially provide their Record
of Processing Activities upon request by the DPC.
The supervisory review process identified and
facilitated the resolution of several material data
protection compliance deficiencies across the
sector, thereby advancing controllers' adherence
to their obligations under the GDPR.
The complexity of processing activities related to
the detection and prevention of criminal activities
continues to present unique data protection
challenges for data controllers in the retail sector.
Through its recent supervisory initiatives, the
DPC has identified the urgent need for robust
safeguards that both protect data subject rights
and support legitimate efforts to tackle increasing
retail crime. The review did not raise any
concerns regarding the use of CCTV monitoring
displays at self-service-checkouts or any material
concerns regarding use of body-worn cameras
but other technologies under consideration will
be subject to further review.

The DPC’s commitment to collaboration and
ongoing regulatory oversight will ensure
sectoral reviews stay focused on improving
compliant processing practices. Recognising
the importance of these developments, the DPC
will further strengthen its targeted engagement
and guidance in this area during 2026. By
maintaining continuous dialogue, assessment,
and support for data controllers, the DPC remains
dedicated to reinforcing sectoral resilience and
promoting high standards of data protection
compliance in response to evolving risks.

SME Project
Throughout 2025, the DPC made significant
progress in understanding the complex
landscape of data processing in micro, small
and medium enterprises.
In line with Goal 5 of the Regulatory
Strategy, the DPC focused on prioritising the
development of guidance for micro, small and
medium enterprises. In order to establish an
understanding of the data protection awareness
of key actors in this area, the DPC engaged
extensively with representative associations
including; the Small Firms Association, ISME,
IBEC, Digital Business Ireland, the Freight
Transport Association of Ireland, the Convenience
Stores and Newsagents Association, the Local
Enterprise Office, Enterprise Ireland, and
Chambers Ireland. The DPC has also co-hosted a
number of webinars for the sectors to enhance
understanding and awareness of data protection
obligations. In November, a public consultation
was published to help support understanding of
the challenges faced by micro, small and medium
enterprise owners in complying with GDPR and
their data protection obligations.

Transact Payment Malta
Limited: Protected Disclosure
In 2023, the DPC received a protected disclosure
related to a number of credit unions who,
by virtue of their Programme Authorisation
Agreement with Transact Payments Malta Limited
(TPML), were required to forward a copy of
Suspicious Transaction Reports to the money
laundering reporting office of TPML which is
located in Malta. The disclosure raised concerns
that, by requiring credit unions to provide TPML
with suspicious transaction reports, TPML was
requiring credit unions to disclose personal data
which, without a substantive legal or legislative
basis for dual STR reporting under AML laws,
was an act of excessive, disproportionate and
unnecessary processing of personal data under
the GDPR.
Following engagement with PAYAC Services
CLG, who acted as a commercial intermediary
in the relationship between TPML and the
credit unions for the purpose of facilitating
the relevant services, and engagement
with colleagues in the Maltese Office of the
Information and Data Protection Commission
and the Financial Intelligence Analysis Unit in
Malta, the Programme Authorisation Agreement
was updated to cease the sharing of suspicious
transaction reports between the credit unions
and TPML.
This case highlights the importance of having
robust data governance structures in place
and the benefits of positive engagement with
the Regulator.

The DPC’s next steps will include a complete
review of the findings of the consultation
and continued engagement with the sector
to assist with the development of tailored
guidance and toolkits.

Supervision

81

Consumer Protection Code
The Consumer Protection Code, was launched in
March 2025 and will come into effect in March
2026. Following feedback provided by the DPC,
the Code was updated to reflect the concerns
raised by the DPC concerning the retention of
personal data for six years when an individual
engages with a firm but does not proceed
to become a customer i.e. when seeking an
insurance quote or applying for a mortgage
online. The updated consumer protection code
confirms that the retention of such data for six
years is not necessary or proportionate and the
updated code requires firms to retain such
information for 12 months. Such engagement
as this clearly demonstrates the DPC’s dedication
to safeguarding the fundamental right to data
protection for all.

LinkedIn: Use of First Party Data to
Train AI Models
In March 2025, LinkedIn informed the DPC of its
intention to train its own proprietary generative
AI models using the personal data of LinkedIn
members based in the EU, beginning in early
November 2025. After extensive engagement
with the company, the DPC identified a number of
issues with the proposed processing of personal
data. The DPC communicated these concerns and
made a number of recommendations to LinkedIn
concerning transparency, data minimisation,
special category data, and processing of data
for individuals under the age of 18.
As a result, LinkedIn adopted a number of
changes to its plan, including:
•

improved transparency notices for users
helping them to understand the personal data
LinkedIn will process to train its AI models and
their ability to opt out if they so wish;

•

a reduction in the scope of the personal
data that LinkedIn would process to train its
models, both in terms of the personal data
to be used and the time period from which it
proposed to draw the data;

82

Supervision

•

improved measures to prevent the personal
data of LinkedIn users under the age of 18
from being used to train the models; and

•

improved measures to protect users,
including through the implementation of filters
to avoid the collection of potentially sensitive
information shared on certain LinkedIn pages
and groups, including trade union content.

The DPC has not approved or found compliant
LinkedIn’s use of users’ personal data for
generative AI model training. However, the
additional measures implemented by LinkedIn
have sufficiently addressed the DPC’s concerns
such that further regulatory intervention is not
considered necessary at present.
The DPC will continue to monitor LinkedIn’s GDPR
compliance and is requiring LinkedIn to compile a
report within five months of the commencement
of processing which, amongst other things, will
include an updated evaluation of the efficacy and
appropriateness of the measures and safeguards.

Data Protection Assessment
of Third-Party Developer Access to
Personal Data of Meta Users – Update
In 2024, the DPC issued an Assessment to Meta
containing a number of recommendations in
relation to its third-party developer access to
personal data. The Assessment was primarily
concerned with access to personal data held by
Meta which is provided to third parties as part
of app development for the Meta platforms. In
February 2025, Meta provided a response on the
report and detailed steps it has taken to comply
with the DPC’s recommendations.
Based on the DPC’s recommendations, Meta
reviewed the existing governance and control
mechanisms over third-party developer access
to data, developed a new system to enable Meta
to oversee implementation of its instructions on
third-party risk management from end-to-end,
and updated policies and procedures around
compliance, enforcement, and oversight of the
developer platform, app onboarding processes,
and app review processes.
In addition, Meta conducted testing to ensure
that the investigations and enforcement
processes were operating effectively. Of
particular importance, Meta confirmed that
developers who fail to fully comply with the
annual review processes will lose access
to personal data until these processes are
completed.

Additionally, Meta clarified that, in order for a
third-party developer to gain access to consumer
data, they must complete, at a minimum, the
following compliance checks:
•

the successful creation and verification
of a developer account;

•

agreement to the Platform Terms and
Developer Policies;

•

completion of Business Verification; and

•

completion of a data-handling questionnaire.

Meta advised that the completion of a datahandling questionnaire is now a compulsory part
of its risk assessment process before advanced
access is granted to a developer. This will also
be incorporated into Meta’s annual Data Use
Checkup for all developers that have advanced
access. Developers cannot complete their
annual data checkup until they complete the
data-handling questionnaire. If the third-party
developer does not successfully complete these
steps, they will not gain advanced access and can
have their access revoked.
The DPC recognises that Meta has taken
steps to minimise risks to individuals through
the changes made on foot of the DPC’s
assessment. The DPC will continue to monitor
Meta’s GDPR compliance and will exercise further
regulatory powers if necessary.

Another concern held by the DPC related
to Meta’s ability to identify a developer who
sought access to personal data. The DPC
recommended re-evaluating the process used
to identify developers and redesigned it where
necessary to provide greater certainty regarding
the developer’s identity, thereby giving Meta a
better basis for risk-assessing developers. This
recommendation has been implemented through
extending existing verification and checks to all
developers, in addition to the introduction of
a data-handling questionnaire which includes
processes to verify the identity of the developer
and the business they represent – as well as a
risk assessment by Meta to determine whether
an increased risk to the privacy of individuals is
presented due to the identity of the developer.

Supervision

83

Meta: Use of First-Party Data
to Train AI Models
In 2025, the DPC continued its extensive
regulatory engagement with Meta regarding
the company’s plans to train its Large Language
Model (LLM) using public content (known as
first-party data) shared by adults on Facebook
and Instagram across the EU.
In February 2025, the DPC received updated data
protection documentation from Meta following
the company’s decision to pause processing in
June 2024, having agreed to the DPC’s original
request to do so.
Meta implemented a number of measures
and improvements based on the DPC’s
recommendations following its review of Meta’s
documentation and through extensive engagement
with the company, including the following:
•

updated transparency notices to users,
including specific notifications to all users in
both 2024 and 2025;

•

updated and more user-friendly objection
form;

•

provision of longer notice period to users and
information on controls available to change all
published posts from public to private to avoid
being trained for the model;

•

ensuring objection forms work in-app, and
in all jurisdictions across Europe; and

•

updated its measures to protect data subjects,
such as de-identification, filtering of data sets
and output filters.

Additionally, the DPC required Meta to compile
a report setting out the appropriateness of the
measures and safeguards it has introduced.
The report is due to be submitted to the DPC
once a training run with EU/EEA data has been
completed. As with all its engagements, the DPC
has not approved or found compliant Meta’s
use of users’ personal data for generative AI
model training. The DPC will continue to monitor
Meta’s GDPR compliance and will exercise further
regulatory powers if necessary.

84

Supervision

Meta: Celeb-Bait
In September 2024, Meta informed the DPC that
it was planning to implement facial recognition
technology to help identify the presence of public
figures in advertisements as a further measure to
detect when an unauthorised image is being
used as ‘celeb-bait’. Celeb-bait is advertising
content which features imagery of public figures,
using their reputation to leverage the trust and
familiarity of the public to defraud people.
Meta stated that the feature was opt-in only,
limited to public figures who are over the age
of 18 and whose likenesses are deemed to be
at high risk of being used in celeb-bait, and
who have consented to the processing of their
image. Additionally, this processing would only
be applied to advertisements which have been
identified through other means as likely to
contain scams. During this engagement with
Meta, the DPC cooperated closely with the Polish
Data Protection Authority which had active
complaints from individuals about their images
being used in celeb-bait.
Through the engagement process, the DPC
identified some areas where Meta could make
the information it was providing to individuals
more transparent and made several
recommendations for improvements.
In response to the DPC’s transparency
recommendations, Meta updated the text on the
in-app notices making it clearer to individuals
what photos would be processed and how long
they would be retained for. Meta also updated
the relevant Help Centre articles to provide
clearer information to individuals regarding the
retention periods for embeddings generated as
part of the processing. The DPC understands that
Meta began processing in the EU in March 2025.

As part of its ongoing monitoring, the DPC
required Meta to compile a report which set
out an updated evaluation of the efficacy and
appropriateness of the measures and safeguards
it has introduced. This report was received in
August 2025 and later shared with European
Data Protection Board colleagues. In the report
Meta indicated that they had received positive
feedback from a number of public figures and
their teams concerning Meta’s efforts to limit the
issue of celeb-bait by leveraging this technology
to improve detection and enforcement.

OpenAI: ChatGPT Agent
In February 2025, the DPC was informed by
OpenAI of plans to launch an optional experience
for individuals called ChatGPT Agent in the EU.
Chat GPT Agent can perform multi-step tasks
on an individual’s behalf, for example finding a
particular product, comparing prices for flights or
booking a table in a restaurant. ChatGPT Agent is
trained to ask for user confirmation prior taking
significant actions, such as to complete booking
reservation, or to log in into a private account.
When the individual completes the action, they
can hand the control back to ChatGPT Agent.

In response to DPC recommendations OpenAI
applied a number of changes, for example:
•

a revised ‘safety and privacy’ section in
OpenAI’s Help Centre article;

•

an updated ChatGPT Agent onboarding
experience with a ‘learn more’ link that directs
users to the updated ‘safety and privacy’
section in the Help Centre article; and

•

the incorporation of additional language to
the in-app onboarding notices specific for
ChatGPT Agent, highlighting the importance
to monitor ChatGPT Agent given that it would
be given significant authority to act on an
individual’s behalf.

OpenAI launched ChatGPT Agent feature in the
EU in July 2025. The DPC will continue to monitor
OpenAI’s GDPR compliance.

As part of the pre-launch engagement, the DPC
reviewed OpenAI’s Data Protection Impact
Assessment (DPIA) and other documentation.
During this review the DPC requested a technical
demonstration of the back-end of ChatGPT Agent
to better understand and view the guardrails that
OpenAI had advised it had in place to protect
individuals. OpenAI brought the DPC through a
demonstration and the security measures put
in place. Through this engagement, the DPC
identified several areas where improvement
was needed, specifically in relation to user
transparency, including improving the basic
information about the novel agentic technology
being shared with individuals and improving the
in-app onboarding notices to be more specific to
ChatGPT Agent.

Supervision

85

Etsy: Chatbot

Inter-Regulatory Affairs

In March 2025, the DPC engaged with Etsy on the
launch of a customer support chatbot in the EU.
Etsy stated that it wished to utilise the chatbot
to assist its EU users by providing answers
to common and frequently asked questions.
Etsy utilised a third-party product for this. The
chatbot was trained on Etsy Help Centre articles,
and other customer service repositories, on
common customer queries and configured not
to engage in general conversations or to use
reasoning to formulate responses outside of its
knowledge base.

Inter-regulatory cooperation was highlighted
as a priority for 2025 on foot of expectations
that the EU’s new digital legislative package (e.g.
the Digital Markets Act the Digital Services Act,
amongst other new EU legislation) would bring
additional complexity and volume to the DPC’s
workload. This has proven to be the case and
during 2025, the DPC played a prominent role in
providing data protection expertise and guidance
to other regulators at national and EU level.
From actively engaging on issues of intersection
and common interest, to establishing new
cooperation mechanisms and procedures, the
DPC held over 50 meetings with peer regulators
and other complaint-handling bodies in 2025.

Through its engagement with Etsy, the DPC
identified some concerns in relation to the
provision of transparency and ensuring
customers were informed on data protection
implications of the chatbot. In addition, the DPC
had concerns about the way Etsy had chosen to
communicate the retention periods associated
with use of the chatbot. After assessment of the
information provided by Etsy, the DPC provided
recommendations in June 2025 highlighting
the need for improvements in transparency, in
particular that individuals would be made aware
what personal data would be processed as a
result of using the Etsy chatbot.
As a result of the DPC’s engagement Etsy made
improvements, including:
•

a hyperlink to the Help Centre article on the
initial greeting screen once the chatbot goes
live; and

•

express reference to the applicable retention
periods for customer support information,
including chat transcripts, in the Etsy Privacy
Policy.

Etsy confirmed that its Privacy Policy was updated
in August 2025 and the chatbot launched in
September 2025. The DPC will continue to
monitor Etsy’s chatbot GDPR compliance.

86

Supervision

From left to right: Commissioners Dale Sunderland, Niamh Sweeney, Des Hogan with Niamh Hodnett (CnaM) and John Evans
(CnaM) signing Cooperation Agreement on the protection of children online.

Publication of Cooperation Agreement
and Joint Statement with Coimisiún
na Meán
October marked a key milestone in the DPC’s
commitment to inter-regulatory cooperation
with the publication of a Cooperation Agreement
with Coimisiún na Meán (CnaM), as well as a joint
statement on the protection of children online.
As active regulators in the digital space, the
DPC recognises the importance of working
closely with CnaM on areas of potential synergy
to ensure that we share expertise and deliver a
coherent and cohesive approach to regulation.
The objective of this Cooperation Agreement
is to provide for a structured, effective working
relationship between both organisations,
including through the appropriate sharing
of information and cooperating on matters
of common interest. The DPC is committed
to putting this Cooperation Agreement into
action and looks forward to continued fruitful
engagement with CnaM in 2026.

The DPC and CnaM also published a joint
statement on advancing the safety of children
and the protection of their personal data online,
in line with Pillar 3 of the DPC’s Regulatory
Strategy, which sets out a strategic objective
to prioritise the protection of children and
vulnerable people. The DPC is committed to
working alongside CnaM to uphold robust
standards that safeguard children’s rights in the
digital environment, where data protection and
online safety are built in from the start. This joint
statement demonstrates a shared commitment
to ensuring that the rights and best interests of
children are respected and upheld by the online
services that both the DPC and CnaM regulate.
The DPC looks forward to continued cooperation
with regard to this important topic. Both
organisations will have regular, structured
engagement in 2026 in the context of the
Cooperation Agreement, and future cooperation
in relation to children may include sharing
insights on emerging risks to the safety and
protection of children’s personal data online
and joint work on educational resources relating
to the protection of children online.
DPC and CnaM
Cooperation Agreement
Supervision

87

Short Guide to Digital Regulation
What is Coimisiún na Meán?
Coimisiún na Meán is Ireland’s agency for
developing and regulating a thriving, diverse,
creative, safe and trusted media landscape. We
are the independent media regulator, responsible
for regulating broadcasters, video-on-demand providers and online platforms established in
Ireland.
We are committed to promoting and upholding fundamental rights, ensuring that our media
landscape contributes to an open, democratic society. Upholding the right to freedom of
expression underpins all areas of our work.
We are responsible for Ireland’s Online Safety Framework. This important framework will hold
digital services accountable for how they protect people, especially children, from online harm.
We oversee the regulation of broadcasting and video-on-demand services in Ireland. Our
regulatory functions include regulation of Public Service Media, licensing of broadcast services,
handling complaints from viewers and listeners and the development of Codes and Rules.

What is ComReg?
ComReg stands for the Commission for Communications
Regulation. We are an independent public body responsible
for the regulation of the electronic communications sector,
which includes phone and broadband.
We have a wide range of responsibilities in electronic communications services and networks
and we operate under Irish and EU Legislation. We protect consumers and provide impartial,
fair advice and information.
We try to make sure you are treated fairly by your service provider by making sure:
•

you’re informed of your consumer rights;

•

measures are in place for vulnerable and disabled consumers;

•

a user-friendly complaints handling process is in place;

•

service providers’ practices comply with consumer protection laws, and taking enforcement
action, where required.

We support Ireland’s media sector through a wide range of activities to help
develop content for Irish audiences that reflects and shapes Irish society. This
includes funding schemes and the implementation of sectoral learning and
development programmes and working with broadcasters to continually advance
gender equality, equity, diversity and inclusion in the Irish media sector.

Our website also has helpful Consumer Tools, including: Broadband
Availabil y Checker, Outdoor Mobile Coverage Map, and Compare for
phone broadband and TV plans.

What is the DPC?

What is the CCPC?

The DPC (Data Protection Commission) is the national data protection authority
in Ireland. We are responsible for making sure that your personal data is used
by companies in compliance with data protection laws.

The CCPC (Competition and Consumer Protection Commission) is responsible for
competition, consumer protection, product safety law and has a new role in digital
and data regulation.
Online shopping: We help consumers make informed choices when they shop online, and
ensure online marketplaces follow the rules, like collecting trader information before they can
sell on their platform. We act when traders mislead or exploit consumers, or when social media
influencers do not disclose ads in their social media posts. We also enforce rights for digital
purchases like streaming services. See our website for more information.
Product safety: We are responsible for the safety of non-food consumer products, such as
toys, baby equipment and low voltage electrical appliances, including goods bought online. We
let consumers know about illegal or unsafe products through our database of product r calls
and on our social media channels.
Encouraging Data Sharing and Fair Online Platforms: We monitor fair, voluntary data
sharing between businesses. Additionally, the CCPC promotes a predictable and fair
environment for traders using online platforms to sell goods or services
to consumers. We engage with the European Commission when needed
on investigations related to large platforms like social media companies.
We will be responsible for ensuring users can access and share data from
connected products like smart-home devices.

Commissioner Des Hogan participating in a panel exploring
the balance between innovation and regulation at the EU
Digital Summit (European Business Summits) in Brussels.

Ireland’s Digital
Regulators Group
The DPC continued to play an active role
as a member of Ireland’s Digital Regulators
Group (DRG) throughout 2025. The DRG —
comprising the DPC, CnaM, the Commission
for Communications Regulation (ComReg), and
the Competition and Consumer Protection
Commission (CCPC) — is a platform for
collaboration between regulators with remit over
the digital space and whose work has a direct
impact on Ireland’s digital economy. This purpose
of this group, which meets monthly, is to support
a coherent and cohesive approach to digital
regulation in Ireland, and to lead and develop
regulatory cooperation on substantive issues of
common interest arising in the digital space.
This year, DRG members collaborated to publish
a Short Guide to Digital Regulation, aimed at
clarifying the different roles and responsibilities
of digital regulators in Ireland, and signposting to
individuals the correct body to whom they should
direct their queries and complaints in respect of
different topics.
Short Guide to Digital
Regulation

88

Supervision

The most well-known law that we regulate is the General Data Protection Regulation, or the
GDPR.
We also have powers related to other important regulatory frameworks including the Irish
ePrivacy Regulations (2011) and the Law Enforcement Directive.
What does the DPC do?
The DPC specifically focuses on the protection of your personal data. Personal data is any piece
of information that helps someone to know who you are, such as your full name, your email
address, or a photo or video of you. It can even include information about what you search for
online or the kinds of posts you like on social media.
The DPC’s core tasks involve:
•

handling complaints lodged by individuals who have concerns about how their personal data
is being used;

•

carrying out investigations and inquiries as to whether data protection laws are being
complied with by companies;

•

cooperating with data protection authorities in other EU
Member States;

•

providing guidance on best practices in data protection
to organisations, companies and the public.

Economic Regulators Network
In 2025 the DPC joined Ireland’s Economic
Regulators Network (ERN). The ERN is an informal
forum that facilitates cooperation between
economic regulators on issues of common
interest, in order to contribute to a better and
more integrated regulatory environment in
Ireland. The current membership of the ERN
consists of several Irish regulators, namely, CnaM,
the CCPC, ComReg, the Central Bank of Ireland
(CBI), the Commission for Regulation Utilities
(CRU), the National Transport Authority (NTA),
and the Irish Aviation Authority (IAA). Given the
central role that personal data plays in the digital
economy, the DPC has become a member of the
ERN by virtue of its regulatory role.

International Network of Digital
Regulation
The DPC, through its membership of Ireland’s
Digital Regulators Group, continued to actively
engage in meetings of the International Network
of Digital Regulation Cooperation (INDRC)
throughout 2025. This network currently
comprises the digital regulation coordination
bodies from Australia, Canada, Ireland, the
Netherlands and the United Kingdom, and meets
every six months to foster discussion between
international regulators on coherence across
digital regimes in their own jurisdictions, and to
gather insights into how they are approaching
these issues.

Cross-Regulatory Interplay and
Cooperation
At EU level, the DPC continued to actively
participate in the EDPB’s Cross-Regulatory
Interplay and Cooperation (CIC) expert subgroup
which was established in late 2024. This group
works to build on synergies between the
regulatory frameworks of data protection,
competition and consumer protection law
and exchange information and promote best
practices as regards cross-regulatory governance
and cooperation, in line with the EDPB’s 2025
Helsinki Statement on enhanced clarity, support
and engagement.5

Digital Markets Act High-Level Group
The DPC was delighted to be reappointed
as an EDPB representative on the DMA
High-Level Group in April 2025. This group
is composed of nominated representatives
from the Body of the European Regulators
for Electronic Communications (BEREC), the
European Data Protection Board (EDPB), the
European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS),
the European Competition Network (ECN), the
Consumer Protection Cooperation Network
(CPC Network), and the European Regulatory
Group of Audiovisual Media Regulators (ERGA).
The purpose of this group is to ensure effective
enforcement of the DMA, give expert advice,
and ensure regulatory alignment across different
EU legislation.

Regulation (EU) 2024/900 of the
European Parliament and of the
Council on the Transparency and
Targeting of Political Advertising
October 2025 witnessed the coming into effect
of Regulation (EU) 2024/900, referred to as the
Transparency and Targeted Political Advertising
Regulation (TTPA). The TTPA aims to empower
citizens to make informed choices in elections
by enhancing transparency and accountability
in political advertising. This Regulation was
transposed into Irish law via S.I. No. 474 of
2025, the ‘European Union (Political Advertising)
Regulations 2025’.
Under S.I. No. 474, the DPC has been designated
as a competent authority in respect of Articles
18 and 19 of the TTPA, which relate to targeting
techniques and ad delivery techniques in the
context of online political advertising. An
Coimisiún Toghcháin and Coimisiún na Meán
have also been designated competent authorities
under this statutory instrument. The DPC will
work closely with both authorities in 2026 to
facilitate cooperation in the performance of
respective functions, with Regulation 7 of S.I.
No 474 providing a basis for cooperation
agreements between all three organisations.

The DPC also continued to actively engage within
the Data-Related Obligations subgroup to the
DMA HLG following its reappointment as an EDPB
representative to this group in 2025.

5

See www.edpb.europa.eu/system/files/2025-07/edpb-statement-20250702-enhanced-clarity-support-engagement_en_0.pdf

Supervision

89

8.
Children’s Data Protection Rights

8. Children’s Data
Protection Rights
Children’s Policy
From external stakeholder engagement and cross-regulatory
cooperation to the launch of a major public awareness-raising
campaign, the protection of children’s personal data remained
a top priority and area of focus for the DPC in 2025.

Pause Before You Post campaign
In November 2025, the DPC launched a national
public awareness campaign entitled Pause
Before You Post. The purpose of this initiative
is to highlight the growing risks associated with
‘sharenting’—the habitual online sharing of
children's personal information, photos, and
videos by parents.

The DPC was delighted to engage with our
French counterpart, the Commission Nationale
de l'Informatique et des Libertés (CNIL) on this
campaign. Both Data Protection Authorities are
committed to safeguarding children online and
supporting parents’ digital literacy; this joint
effort directly advances the strategic priorities
of both organisations.

Children’s Data Protection Rights

91

The importance of addressing this issue was
underscored by a 2024 digital parenting survey,
conducted by the international Digital Education
Working Group of the Global Privacy Assembly.
The survey identified sharenting as a topic of
concern with potential harmful implications
for children’s rights and personal data.
The primary objective of the Pause Before You
Post campaign was to highlight the inherent
risks of parents posting their children’s personal
data online. The DPC worked with an external
agency on the creative concept and a 40-second
video was produced for broadcast on national
television and in cinemas for a 6-week period in
November and December. Since its publication,
the campaign has reached a wide audience,
generating over 150 million views globally,
including 45 million views across the DPC’s
social channels.
Internationally, the campaign generated extensive
traction with coverage and discussion in countries
such as the United States, Australia, Brazil, the
United Kingdom, Nigeria, and South Africa. It was
featured and debated on podcasts and television
programmes, sparking widespread global
conversation on the inherent risks of parents
sharing their children’s personal data online.

Sha renting

Pause Before You Postl
Sharenting Risks
Misuse for Harmful Purposes

••

When we share online, we risk images being used in malicious ways. A recent
studyc11 showed that only 20 images of a child are needed to create a
deepfake video of them and parents upload an average of 63 images to
social media every month!

International Headlines
Domestically, the campaign featured across all
major Irish news outlets and prompted significant
national discussion on the issue. Research
conducted by the DPC’s agency partner, Core,
shows that seven in ten parents of primary
school–going children in Ireland have seen
the advertisement in some form. Further
analysis indicates that it is the most watched
Irish advertisement of the past five years.
The impact and success of this initiative
exceeded expectations as its message has
resonated strongly with parents, privacy
professionals, children’s rights organisations,
the media and NGOs alike.
To further delve into the topic of sharenting,
the DPC also commissioned a survey of over
1,000 parents to be carried out in Ireland and
France to gain insights into the social media use
and information-sharing practices of parents
in relation to their children. The field work for
the survey was carried out in both countries in
October/November 2025, prior to the launch
of the advertisement, and the results will be
published in 2026.

‘Pause before you post’ – Irish
advertisement on online safety
and ‘sharenting’ goes viral
– Irish Independent

Digital Footprint
By sharing about their children online, parents are creating a
digital footprint for their child from a very early age, that may be
difficult to erase later on.
Unwanted Contact
Photos and videos contain information about the location and
time at which they were taken (metadata, GPS data) which can
reveal valuable information about your children.
Identity Theft and Fraud
Information revealed about a child such as ther name, date of birth,
school, etc. can be misused to hack passwords or for identity fraud
scamsP1

Sharenting Tips
Limit your A udience

- -

.. ....

Set profile to •Private• and only
share posts with close friends.
Avoid Oversharing

- -

Cover your child's face or position
them faced away from the camera
and blur out any other identifiable
information.

Location, Location
Turn off geo-location settings
and ensure there is no other
information within the image that
could pinpoint your location.

-

Expert warns parents over Al deepfakes of children (RTE, May

2025)
2

'Sharenting' puts young at risk of online fraud (BBC, May

2018)

92

– The Journal

Review your Posts
Regularly review the posts you
have shared and delete any
that you, or your child, are no
longer comfortable sharing.

Have open discussions with your child before posting information about them
on social media. Remember, it's their personal data you are sharing, not yours.

1

This ‘terrifying’ Irish ad about
online child safety plays out like a
dystopian horror movie

Pause Before You Post

An Coimisi(m um
Chosaint Sonraf
Data Protection
Commission

Children’s Data Protection Rights

Map showing mentions of the advertisement around the world provided by Core.

External Speaking Engagements
Over the course of 2025 the DPC contributed
to events addressing latest developments and
trends in the field of children’s data protection
and online safety. This included panel discussions
on global strategies for child safety and privacy
(IAPP Washington, April 2025), balancing
innovation with responsibility and empowering
young users to navigate the internet safely
(Venice Privacy Symposium, May 2025), and the
intersection of AI and the protection of children
in the digital world, which saw the DPC, Coimisiún
na Meán and CyberSafeKids come together to
discuss this critical topic.
The DPC was also grateful for the opportunity,
this year, to engage with Ireland’s Online Health
Taskforce. This taskforce was established by the
Minister for Health in 2024 to develop a public
health response to harms caused to children and
young people by certain types of online activity,
with its members compromising experts in the
field of child safety. The DPC gave a presentation
to the taskforce in June of 2025 on the DPC’s
ongoing work on the protection of children’s
personal data online.

The DPC attended numerous events throughout
2025 in the area of children’s data protection
in order to develop and maintain knowledge,
and to meet with important stakeholders in
the sector. These events covered many childrencentred topics such as AI literacy, age assurance,
algorithms, and data protection by design and
default. Events attended included Ireland’s
Safer Internet Day stakeholder event hosted
by Webwise, Google’s Growing Up in the Digital
Age, Meta’s Youth Privacy Forum, Privacy Laws
& Business’s whole-day event on children’s
data protection issues, and the Global Age
Assurance Summit.
The DPC also continued to participate as a
member of a number of external working groups
focused on children’s data protection issues,
including the UK Information Commissioner’s
Office (ICO)’s International Age Assurance Working
Group which held a number of meetings and
‘teach-ins’ throughout the year. The DPC is also an
active member of the Global Privacy Assembly’s
Digital Education Working Group, chaired by the
CNIL, and in 2025, we joined the working group’s
taskforce on digital parenting as part of European
Year of Digital Citizenship Education.

Children’s Data Protection Rights

93

Engagement with Statutory Bodies
The DPC met with relevant statutory bodies to
discuss developments in the area of children’s
data protection issues. One such example
is the Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner (OAIC), who approached the
DPC to gain insights into our experience around
the development of the DPC’s ‘fundamentals’
guidance, as they had been tasked with
developing a children’s code in Australia.
The DPC was delighted to facilitate the OAIC’s
request to use associated educational materials
in the context of a public consultation they
intended to roll out across Australian schools.
In October 2025, the DPC and Coimisiún na Meán
signed a Cooperation Agreement and issued a
Joint Statement on Children entitled Advancing
the Safety of Children and the Protection of
Their Personal Data Online. The Cooperation
Agreement enables both regulators to work
closely together, including for the purposes of
cooperating on matters of common interest and
one such area of common interest is the need
to ensure that the rights and best interests of
children are respected and upheld by the online
services that An Coimisiún and the DPC regulate.

Work on Children’s Issues within the
European Data Protection Board
The DPC’s focus and dedication to the complex
issue of age assurance in the digital environment
continued at an EU level throughout 2025.
The DPC contributed to the drafting of the
Statement being prepared by the EDPB on
general data protection principles and criteria
for age assurance systems. This Statement,
establishing 10 guiding principles to ensure
that age assurance methods respect the
fundamental rights of individuals and uphold the
values of the GDPR, was published in February
2025. The Statement also aims to ensure a
consistent European approach to age assurance,
to protect minors while complying with data
protection principles.
Statement of Age
Assurance

The joint statement highlights that future
cooperation may include sharing insights on
emerging risks to the safety and protection of
children’s personal data online, joint work on
educational resources relating to the protection
of children online, and other areas of mutual
interest. Work on this will continue into 2026.
Advancing the Safety of Children and
the Protection of Their Personal Data
Online

94

Children’s Data Protection Rights

9.
Data Protection
Oﬃcers

9. Data Protection Officers
The position of Data Protection Officer (DPO) as set out under
the GDPR is an essential pillar for ensuring both compliance and
accountability on the part of data controllers. Designated DPOs
under Articles 37-39 of the GDPR both advise their organisations
on data processing matters and monitor compliance such as
organisational adherence to data protection policies and data
processing agreements. DPOs often play a key part in training
in their organisation, which helps to build a culture of data
protection awareness and contributes to better outcomes for
data subjects in how their personal data is processed.
Where a DPO has been designated by an
organisation it is required that they are
adequately supported by management and
resourced to allow them to carry out their tasks,
and failure to do so is an infringement of the
GDPR. Adequate resourcing means that the
DPO should have access to necessary financial
resources, infrastructure, supports staff, and
training. Where DPOs may also carry out other
functions in the organisation, it must be ensured
that they have adequate capacity to carry out
their DPO tasks, allowed to act independently
within the organisation in the performance of
their duties, and that any other work does not
give rise to a conflict of interests.
For certain sectors and organisations, the
appointment of a DPO is mandatory under the
GDPR (public bodies, controllers carrying out
large scale, regular and systematic monitoring
of data subjects; controllers carrying out large
scale processing of special categories of personal
data or data relating to criminal convictions and
offences). Where the appointment of a DPO is a
statutory requirement, it is particularly important
that controllers meet their obligations to support
and resource the function, due to the nature and
scale of personal data processing. During the
course of 2025 the DPC undertook a number
of supervisory examinations of the resourcing
of DPOs and will continue to do so in 2026.

96

DPOs also play an important role as the primary
contact point for the DPC in their organisation,
and as such are an important stakeholder group.
The DPC continued to support DPOs and raise
awareness of the importance of their role in
2025. During 2025 the DPC supported designated
DPOs and data protection compliance teams
across all sectors including;
•

The Health Research Data Protection Network;

•

Sports Sector DPOs and compliance officers;

•

Charity and Voluntary Sector DPOs and
compliance officers;

•

The Civil Service DPO Network;

•

The LGMA Local Authorities DPO Network.

As part of the requirements of GDPR, the DPC
must be notified of the formal designation of a
DPO by an organisation. As of the end of the 2025
the DPC has been notified of the designation of
4,218 DPOs broken down by sector as follows:

Data Protection Officers

Notiﬁcation of Data Protection Oﬃcers
4,000
3,500

3,578

3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0

376
Public Sector

264
Private Sector

Not-for-proﬁt Sector

4,218 Total

In 2025, the DPC DPO Network furthered its
work promoting data protection awareness
through participation in a number of events,
including the following:

Deputy Commissioner David Murphy delivered a presentation
at a Civil Service DPO Meeting held in the DPC office in
Pembroke Row, June 2025.

DPC DPO Network
The DPC DPO Network is an initiative of the
DPC, designed to support DPOs and privacy
professionals across Ireland. The DPC DPO
Network endeavours to deliver high-quality
support through the facilitation of networking
opportunities and dissemination of information
relating to events and new guidance, with a
key aim of raising awareness of the GDPR and
importance of ensuring compliance with data
protection legislation.

•

the DPC DPO Network Team hosted an
information stand at the Wheel’s Charity
Summit in Croke Park;

•

the DPC DPO Network Team hosted an
information stand at the PDP AI and Data
Compliance Update Summit at the offices
of William Fry Solicitors; and

•

the DPC DPO Network Team hosted an
information stand at the National Ploughing
Championships 2025 in Tullamore as part
of the Government of Ireland Village, in
the Supporting People/Supporting Business
marquee.

Each of these events provided an opportunity
for individuals to engage with the DPC, allowing
the DPC DPO Network to offer support and to
signpost the helpful DPC guidance available.

Data Protection Officers

97

10.
International
Activities

10. International Activities
European Data Protection Board
and Supervisory Bodies

Continued Cooperation with other
EDPB Supervisory Authorities 2025

Each European Union (EU) Member State and
European Economic Area (EEA) country6 has a
national data protection supervisory authority
responsible for enforcing data protection laws
and regulation within their jurisdiction. The
European Data Protection Board (EDPB) is an
independent body responsible for ensuring
that the GDPR and Law Enforcement Directive
are consistently applied in EU and EEA. The
EDPB comprises a chairperson, two deputy
chairpersons and members of each national
data protection authority and the European
Data Protection Supervisor. It meets at monthly
plenary and expert subgroup meetings and has
the following main tasks:

Recognising the importance placed on
cooperation in cross-border matters under
the GDPR, the DPC continued its engagement
with its fellow European Data Protection
Supervisory Authorities.

•

to issue opinions, guidelines,
recommendations and best practices to
promote a common understanding of the
GDPR and the Law Enforcement Directive;

•

to advise the European Commission on any
issue related to the protection of personal
data in the Union;

•

to contribute to the consistent application
of the GDPR, in particular in cross-border
data protection cases; and

•

to promote cooperation and the effective
exchange of information and best practices
between national supervisory authorities.

In 2025, the DPC attended and actively
participated in over 140 meetings including
all monthly EDPB plenary meetings, as well
as expert subgroup meetings.

As part of the on-going co-operation and
communication between the DPC and the
other EU/EEA supervisory authorities in 2025,
the DPC received 1,015 voluntary and formal
mutual assistance requests7 from other
European regulators.
In 2025, the DPC submitted the following to
the GDPR Article 608 cooperation process:
•

88 Provisional Decisions in cross-border
complaint and own-volition inquiries;

•

7 Final Decisions in cross-border complaint
and own-volition inquiries;

•

163 notifications of amicable resolutions
achieved in cross-border complaints; and

•

28 Dismissals, where the DPC was LSA
and four where the supervisory authority
submitting the complaint to the DPC were
required to draft a Final Decision to dismiss
the complaint.

Through enhanced cooperation, the DPC
engaged with its peer regulators at all levels
during 2025, with a focus on ensuring that EDPB
supervisory authorities were kept informed of
DPC activities on draft and final decisions at all
stages of proceedings.

6	European Economic Area. The EEA includes Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway.
7	Article 61 of the GDPR – Mutual assistance.
8
Article 61 of the GDPR - Cooperation between the lead supervisory authority and the other supervisory authorities concerned.

International Activities

99

Reviewed Article 60 Draft Decisions/Revised Draft Decisions
180

40% increase

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

2023

2024

As a Concerned Supervisory Authority, the DPC
reviewed 158 Article 60 Draft Decisions/revised
Draft Decisions from other lead supervisory
authorities which represented a 40% increase on
the Draft Decisions reviewed in the previous year.
It also engaged in 27 Informal Consultations
submitted to it by peer DPAs during the year.
The DPC also facilitated numerous bilateral
engagement meetings with members of EDBP
supervisory authorities at all levels on various
topics including complaints, inquiries, best
practices and matters of individual concern
to specific supervisory authorities.
As part of its engagement with supervisory
authorities at a European level, the DPC:
•

held commissioner-level engagements
with various EDPB supervisory authorities,
including visits to Finland, France, Germany,
and Italy as well as the United Kingdom;

•

participated in the high-level meeting of the
European Data Protection Board, at which
the Helsinki Statement was adopted;

•

participated in the European Case Handling
Workshop in Pristina, Kosovo;

100

2025

•

represented the European Data Protection
Board at the High-Level Group for the Digital
Markets Act;

•

represented the European Data Protection
Board at the High-Level Group Sub-Group
for data related obligations of the Digital
Markets Act;

•

represented the European Data Protection
Board at Working Group 6 – Protection of
Minors of the European Board for Digital
Services;

•

welcomed the Austrian Data Protection
Authority for a study visit to the DPC;

•

welcomed secondees from the French and
Norwegian Data Protection Authorities; and

•

was a secondee to the Norwegian Data
Protection Authority.

International Activities

Central and Eastern Europe Data
Protection Authorities (CEEDPA)
Conference
In June, 2025, representatives from the
DPC attended the Central and Eastern
Europe Data Protection Authorities
(CEEDPA) Conference, hosted in Krakow
by the Polish DPA.
The conference had very insightful
presentations and discussions on the
topic of quantum technology, presented
by various speakers including physicists,
computer scientists and regulators. The
DPC had valuable engagements with
our counterparts in Central and Eastern
European DPAs on the topic of SME
compliance with the GDPR.

European Case Handling
Workshop in Pristina, Kosovo
In November 2025, representatives from the
DPC’s national and cross-border complaint
handling teams attended the European
Complaint Handling Workshop (ECHW)
2025, which took place in Pristina, Kosovo.
This workshop, which was hosted by the
Information and Privacy Agency of Kosovo
and funded by the Council of Europe,
brought together over 70 representatives
of data protection authorities from 23
European countries, and allowed for the
valuable exchange of experience and
knowledge on the topics faced across
all authorities.

EDPB AI Audit Bootcamp
In October 2025, representatives from
the DPC attended the EDPB bootcamp,
focusing on auditing in the context of
AI models and systems. The bootcamp
consisted of a collection of workshops
and presentations, led by the EDPB and
various SAs.

International Activities

101

Commissioners Dale Sunderland and Des Hogan, along with representatives from other European Data Protection Authorities
at the EDPB meeting in Helsinki, July 2025.

Helsinki Statement9
In July 2025, Commissioners Hogan and
Sunderland attended a high-level meeting
of EU Data Protection Commissioners in
Helsinki. At this meeting, the EDPB adopted
a landmark Statement on enhanced clarity,
support and engagement.
The Helsinki Statement outlines new initiatives
to make GDPR compliance easier, in particular
for micro, small and medium organisations,
strengthen consistency and boost crossregulatory cooperation.
Helsinki Statement

9

102

According to the EDPB Chair, Anu Talus: ‘The EDPB
aims to ensure that compliance with the GDPR can
be more easily achieved. By placing fundamental
rights into the core of their digital transformation,
organisations can ensure that technological
advancements and the respect for European values
go hand in hand, ultimately building a stronger
and more resilient digital economy… The EDPB is
committed to helping organisations in achieving
GDPR compliance with greater ease and efficiency.
Through timely and concise guidance and ready-touse tools, like a common data breach notification
template, checklists, how-to’s and FAQs, we will
continue to make GDPR alignment achievable
and accessible for all’.
This Statement sets out how the EDPB will:
•

strengthen its dialogue with stakeholders;

•

enhance consistency of the application and
enforcement of the GDPR; and

•

further proactively engage with other regulators
to support the new cross-regulatory landscape.

For further information see https://www.edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/our-documents/statements/helsinki-statementenhanced-clarity-support-and-engagement_en

International Activities

Commissioners Dale Sunderland and Niamh Sweeney met with Michael McGrath, EU Commissioner for Democracy,
Justice, the Rule of Law and Consumer Protection.

Brussels Attaché
Following a successful pilot phase that began in
mid-2023, the DPC has decided to maintain its
full-time presence in Brussels via its Brusselsbased Attaché. The ability of the DPC to have
a permanent presence in Brussels on a day-today basis has been highly valuable, and this has
continued throughout 2025.
During the year, the Attaché supported the
DPC’s regular engagement with Brussels-based
stakeholders through structured, ongoing
interaction, including the European Parliament,
the European Commission, the EDPB Secretariat,
and peer supervisory authorities. This work
aligns with the DPC’s emphasis on engagement
with all such stakeholders associated with the
EU institutions, and beyond.
The Attaché also maintained regular
engagement with civil society and regulated
entities, including through participation in
public events and targeted meetings, where
appropriate. In parallel, daily liaison was
maintained with teams across the DPC to ensure
timely internal feedback and coordination
arising from Brussels-based engagements.

A notable engagement during 2025 was the
organisation of a meeting in March between
the Commissioners and Ireland’s MEPs, at which
the work of the DPC, both domestically and as
the lead supervisory authority for many large
multinational companies based in the EU/EEA,
was outlined. Ongoing engagement with MEPs
with a particular interest in data protection
remained a priority.
The Commissioners also met with EU
Commissioner Michael McGrath and with
Ireland’s Permanent Representative to the EU,
Aingeal O’Donoghue, with discussions with
the latter focusing in particular on Ireland’s
forthcoming Presidency of the Council of the
European Union in the second half of 2026. In
addition, the Commissioners met with members
of the French National Assembly in Brussels,
contributing to the development of a report
concerning TikTok, with a focus on minors.
Consistent with the DPC’s broader focus on
public engagement, the Attaché participated in
over 30 public events during the year (including
conferences, panel discussions, and roundtables).
The Attaché also continued active participation
in EDPB work and attended 22 EDPB expert
sub-group meetings, in addition to attendance

International Activities

103

at EDPB Plenary. Another important aspect of
the Attaché’s work was following progress on the
new Procedural Harmonisation Regulation, which
was agreed by the EU co-legislators in November
2025, and aims to harmonise procedural rules in
cross-border cases under the GDPR, to which the
One-Stop-Shop mechanism applies.

EDPB Key Concepts Project

The Attaché will continue to represent the DPC
in Brussels, reflecting the ongoing importance the
DPC places on engagement and collaboration.

•

ensuring the availability of data for the regular
evaluation and review of the GDPR (Art. 97);

•

obtaining an accurate view of the Supervisory
Authorities’ actual work and supporting their
initiatives (including requests of additional
resources); and

•

improving transparency and contributing to
a better understanding of the Supervisory
Authorities’ activity and positions.

​Looking ahead, priorities will include engagement,
which may increase during Ireland’s 2026 Council
Presidency and continued monitoring of key EU
policy files expected to be negotiated by Member
States and the European Parliament, including
the Commission’s proposed Digital Omnibus
and AI Omnibus.

The Key Concepts Project, launched by the
EDPB, aims to collect data on all Data Protection
Authorities’ activities across members in a
uniform way. From the perspective of the EDPB,
the objectives of the project include:

The DPC supports this project and looks forwards
to seeing its activities reflected in these data sets
when published by the EDPB.

Commissioner Des Hogan in conversation with Pascale Davies of Euronews at the Web Summit 2025 in Lisbon, Portugal.

104

International Activities

From left to right: ICO Commissioner John Edwards, DPC Commissioner Dale Sunderland, CNIL President Marie-Laure Denis
and, Chairperson of Korea’s Personal Information Protection Commission, Haksoo Ko signed a joint declaration at the AI Action
Summit held in Paris.

Cooperation with International
Supervisory Authorities in 2025
Further to engagement at a European level,
the DPC engaged with international supervisory
authorities, including bilateral engagements
with: the UK Information Commissioner’s
Office; Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner; US Federal Trade Commission
and the Personal Information Protection
Commission, Korea.
The DPC signed a joint declaration along
with Australia, Korea, France and the United
Kingdom, at an OECD hosted event to reaffirm
their commitment to implementing data
governance that promotes innovative and
privacy-protecting AI.

The DPC participated in:
•

international meeting of DPAs, Washington,
USA;

•

the Global Privacy Assembly in Seoul, Korea;

•

the Privacy Symposium in Italy;

•

the British, Irish and Islands Data Protection
Authorities (BIIDPA) annual meeting in
Guernsey;

•

Participation at the AI Action Summit,
Paris; and

•

Participation at the EU Digital Summit,
Brussels.

International Activities

105

Global Privacy Assembly10
In September 2025, the DPC participated in the
Global Privacy Assembly.
The Global Privacy Assembly’s mission is to
provide leadership at an international level in
data protection and privacy by connecting the
efforts of authorities from around the world.
The 2025 conference was hosted by the Personal
Information Protection Commission of the
Republic of Korea. The DPC’s participation in the
annual conference is an opportunity for the DPC
to share knowledge, develop policy positions
and influence the development of global privacy
standards. The conference had both open and
closed sessions, which were only attended by
accredited members and observers of the
Global Privacy Assembly.

From left to right: Deputy Commissioner Gráinne Hawkes,
Commissioner Des Hogan, Irish Ambassador to the
Republic of Korea; Michelle Winthrop and Commissioner
Dale Sunderland at the Global Privacy Assembly in Seoul,
September 2025.

The DPC spoke on four different panels at the
conference across the open and closed sessions:
•

Mechanisms and Policy Instruments to
Support AI Innovation;

•

Mastering Investigation Strategies and
Choosing the Right Enforcement Tools;

•

Re-using Health Data: Balancing AI Health
Innovation and Privacy in a Cross-Border
Context; and

•

Promoting a Safe Digital Childhood.

In a joint signing ceremony, the DPC welcomed
additional signatories from peer DPAs to
the joint declaration on building trustworthy
data governance frameworks to encourage
development of innovative and privacy-protective
AI which the DPC had signed with Australia,
Korea, France and the UK in February 2025.

From left to right: Commissioner Dale Sunderland,
Chairperson PIPC: Hacksoo Ko and Commissioner Des Hogan
at the Global Privacy Assembly in Seoul, September 2025.

The DPC was also very proud to co-sponsor the
three resolutions adopted by the closed session
of the Global Privacy Assembly:
•

Resolution on the Collection, Use and
Disclosure of Personal Data to Pre-Train,
Train and Fine-Tune AI Models;

•

Resolution on Meaningful Human Oversight
of Decisions Involving AI Systems; and

•

Resolution on Digital Education, Privacy
and Personal Data Protection for Responsible
Inclusive Digital Citizenship.

The DPC used the conference as an opportunity
for in-person meetings with international DPAs
and held numerous bilateral meetings over the
five-day conference, including with Australia,
Korea, US and Dubai.

10

106

For further information see https://globalprivacyassembly.com/

International Activities

Certification
In Ireland, the DPC is the supervisory authority
responsible for approval of data protection
criteria in certification schemes, while the Irish
National Accreditation Board (INAB) is responsible
for the accreditation of Certification Bodies (CBs)
that intend operating such schemes.
The DPC appreciates that the appeal of data
protection certification measures across Europe
appears to have been limited to date. To address
this, in 2025, the DPC joined an EDPB working
group focused on improving certification brand
awareness and take-up of such schemes.

From left to right: Commissioners Hogan and Sunderland
accepting a Global Privacy Assembly Award, September 2025.

In addition to the participation on panels and
engagements with international Data Protection
Authorities, the DPC was honoured to be
shortlisted for a Global Privacy Assembly
Award for enforcement in relation to its work
in the area of the use of surveillance systems
by county councils.

A ‘Register of certification mechanisms, seals
and marks can be found on the EDPB’s website:
www.edpb.europa.eu. There are currently three
approved European Certification Schemes, the
rest being national schemes.
Whilst no certification bodies in Ireland have
sought accreditation to offer certifications under
any of these EU certification schemes to date,
certification bodies have been set up in other
members states; and controllers and processors
are encouraged to explore the possibility of
seeking to be certified by those certification
bodies under these schemes.
The DPC continued to work closely with its EU
colleagues at the European Data Protection Board
(EDPB) during 2025, on the assessment of a
number of national and EU certification schemes
in addition to improving internal procedures and
developing further guidelines for stakeholders.
The DPC attended an EDPB Certification
workshop in Berlin in June, where work continued
on multiple projects, including discussions on
how best to implement a certification scheme to
enable international transfers as envisaged under
Article 46(1)(f). In addition, the DPC acted as coreviewer on a national certification scheme for
another supervisory authority for the first time.

International Activities

107

EDPB Coordinated Enforcement
Framework (CEF) 2025

International Transfers - Binding
Corporate Rules

In 2025, the DPC participated in the Coordinated
Enforcement Framework (CEF) action led by the
EDPB on the right to erasure under Article 17
of the GDPR. As part of the initiative, the DPC
surveyed 40 controllers across both public and
private sectors to assess the implementation
of Article 17.

The DPC frequently takes a lead EU role in the
assessment and approval of Binding Corporate
Rules (BCR) applications from multinational
companies. BCRs are a set of binding data
protection polices which underpin transfers
when group members established in the EU
transfer data to group members outside the EU.

The main objectives of this coordinated action
were to ensure that the right to erasure can be
effectively exercised by individuals in Europe and
understand how controllers comply with this
right in practice. In addition, the EDPB identified
good practices and the most important related
challenges, with the aim of providing further
guidance on this topic. The exercise identified
three substantial issues:

A typical application consists of a large volume
of documentation, comprising all the policies
required to demonstrate the commitments
being made along with the contractual binding
mechanism and any other documents the
group considers necessary to supplement their
application.

•

some controllers reported that they do not
have procedures or policies in place to handle
erasure requests;

•

controllers indicated that they must consult
with multiple stakeholders before the right can
be exercised; and

•

it was identified that not all controllers provide
training to staff members on how to handle
erasure requests.11

The review can take some time and also will
involve seeking the views of two other SAs during
the co-review phase and the views of all SAs
during the co-operation phase. We then coordinate and collate these responses, discussing
them with the applicant to come to a draft that
all SAs are satisfied with. Once we reach this
stage an Opinion of the EDPB is sought under
Article 64(2) and the DPC can formally approve
the application once that Opinion is received.

11	Further information on the 2025 CEF action can be found at edpb_cef-report_2025_right-to-erasure_annex_en.pdf

108

International Activities

2025 BCRs

BCR Annual Updates

The DPC was BCR lead in relation to 13 BCR
applications from eight different companies.  
Four of these applications were submitted
to the EDPB seeking an Article 64 Opinion
and subsequently approved by DPC in 2025
— Controller and Processor BCR application
for Shopify International and Controller and
Processor BCR application for Intec Billing Ireland
Limited on behalf of the group CSG Systems
International Inc (CSG Group).

Once the BCR applications are approved, the DPC
continues to have a significant ongoing oversight
role. Each BCR holder is required to submit an
update of their BCR on an annual basis which will
require review. In 2025 the DPC was lead SA on
33 approved BCRs for 21 different BCR holders.
The list of these approved BCR files is published
on the DPC website.

The DPC also assisted other European Data
Protection authorities by acting as co-reviewer
for another SA on nine BCR applications from
six different companies and participated on
drafting teams as rapporteurs for Article 64
Opinions on seven BCR applications from
five different companies.

In addition, the EDPB issued a total of 25 Article
64 opinions on BCR applications in 2025 and the
DPC reviewed each of these applications.

BCR EDPB opinions

DPC participation at the EDPB
International Transfers Expert
Sub-group (ITESG)
Transfers of personal data to third countries or
international organisations is a critical area of
protection for EU/ EEA citizens under Chapter V
of the GDPR.
In 2025, staff from the DPC attended 11
meetings of the EDPB ITS ESG in 2025. This
sub-group of the EDPB meets to consider, advise
and prepare guidance documentation on matters
concerning International Transfers. In addition,
staff from the DPC attended additional meetings
with ITS colleagues and other export sub-groups
for dedicated meetings on matters such as UK
Adequacy, Brazil Adequacy and Certification.

International Activities

109

Case Study: BCR Application
in Focus
Shopify International Limited
Shopify is a subscription-based e-commerce platform used by
retailers. When Shopify processes human resource data, or
information relating to its consultants, contractors, customers,
merchants, their representatives, partners, or service providers,
that data may be handled by operational teams based in
third countries; Because of this, Shopify must ensure that all
international data transfers comply with the requirements of
Chapter V of the GDPR prior to any transfers taking place.
The group determined that a BCR would be the best option
to provide adequate safeguards when it needed to transfer
data within the group for scenarios where it acted as both
a Controller and a Processor.
Shopify International Limited, on behalf of the group Shopify,
approached the DPC to act as BCR lead to seek approval for
their Controller and Processor BCRs. These were handled as two
separate BCRs because each received its own Article 64 opinion.
Shopify International limited is the EEA headquarters and their
EEA data protection compliance team is centred in Ireland. The DPC
assessed the application material provided to ensure the criteria
required to act as Lead BCR under WP263 was being met. Once
satisfied with the information provided during the initial application
process, the DPC informed all SAs that it was happy to act as the
BCR lead and provided them with opportunity to object. As there
were no objections, the DPC advised Shopify it could act as their
BCR lead and requested the full suite of documentation
The DPC reviewed the BCR documentation and provided comments
back and forth with the applicant until the DPC were satisfied that
the BCR was meeting the requirements set out in the elements
and principles of the 01/2022 recommendations and WP257.
Issues that typically arise during BCR assessment phases are
where the applicants fail to demonstrate where they are making
the commitments. As part of the assessment of all BCR files, the
DPC will advise on where the text requires amendment often
providing drafting suggestions and signposting what part of the
recommendations need to be reflected more fully.
The EDPB issued two positive Opinions, 17/2025 and 18/2025,
in September 2025 on this BCR file and the DPC confirmed its
approval by way of a National Decision issued to the applicant
in October 2025.

110

International Activities

11.
Human Resources,
Communications and
Corporate Governance

11. Human Resources,
Communications and
Corporate Governance

From left to right: Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and Migration, Jim O’Callaghan, Taoiseach Micheál Martin, Commissioner
Des Hogan and Commissioner Dale Sunderland officially open the DPC’s new headquarters in Dublin, May 2025.

New DPC Premises, 6 Pembroke Row,
Dublin 2
The DPC identified and acquired, with the
assistance of the Office of Public Works (OPW),
a new fit-for-purpose Dublin office which
provides flexibility to allow staff to work in a
mixture of environments, such as breakout
rooms and collaboration areas, in both private
and open-plan areas. This has helped to embed
collaborative and interdisciplinary modes of
working within the DPC and provides sufficient
meeting room resources to facilitate our
supervisory/regulatory functions when meeting
with stakeholders. This multi-year project was
completed on 29 May 2025, when Taoiseach
Micheál Martin officially opened the DPC
new headquarters.
112

Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

Human Resources
Recruitment
During 2025, the DPC continued to expand
and strengthen its workforce in response to
its evolving regulatory remit and the growing
operational demands at both national and EU
level. Recruitment activity remained sustained
and wide-ranging throughout the year, reflecting
both organisational growth and the increasing
specialisation required to support the DPC’s
regulatory, legal, technological, and international
functions.
Over the course of the year, 66 new staff
members joined the organisation, 22 staff exited,
and 25 internal promotions were progressed.
Recruitment was achieved through a strategic
mix of external talent attraction and internal
career progression including; Public Jobs
competitions, external campaigns delivered
in partnership with a recruitment consultant,
internal confined recruitment campaigns, and
the Civil Service Mobility Scheme.

A number of targeted recruitment competitions
were run during 2025 to address priority
capability needs across the organisation.
These included:
•

Confined Executive Officer (EO);

•

Confined Higher Executive Officer (HEO);

•

ICT Regulatory Technologist (HEO);

•

Legal Analyst (HEO);

•

Assistant Principal (AP) Regulatory
Technologist; and

•

Senior Regulatory Lawyer (AP).

These competitions reflect the DPC’s continued
focus on strengthening specialist legal, technical,
and regulatory expertise, alongside developing
leadership capacity at middle and senior
management levels.
By year-end 2025, the DPC had reached a total
headcount of 295. Recruitment activity will
continue into 2026.

Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

113

2022

2023

2024

2025

New Joiners

45

44

70

66

Leavers

45

24

27

22

Internal Promotions

33

15

21

25

DPC Total Workforce
Date

No.

1st January 2023

196

1st January 2024

213

1st January 2025

251

1st January 2026

295

Employee Engagement and
Organisational Culture

Industrial and Employee Relations

Employee engagement and culture development
remained a key focus during 2025. The Employee
Engagement Forum (EEF) led a range of initiatives
aimed at strengthening communication,
connection, and shared understanding across
the organisation.
A significant milestone during the year was the
development of the DPC Employee Statement
of Values. This was informed by consultation
with staff and a facilitated workshop process.
The Statement articulates shared values and
behavioural expectations intended to support
a positive workplace culture and alignment
with the organisation’s mission. The EEF also
facilitated engagement activities across both
office locations, in Dublin and Portarlington and
experienced increased levels of correspondence
from staff during the year, reflecting growing
awareness and participation.

Constructive engagement with staff
representative unions remained a central feature
of the DPC’s employee relations framework
throughout 2025. Under the Scheme of
Conciliation and Arbitration for the Civil Service,
four quarterly Departmental Council meetings
were held during the year, providing a structured
forum for engagement on a wide range of
organisational and workforce matters between
management and recognised unions.
Discussions during the year included
recruitment and workforce planning updates,
the development of internal policies, and other
matters relating to conditions of service. In
parallel with formal industrial relations structures,
the DPC provided ongoing, case-by-case
employee relations advice and support to line
managers and staff, supporting the consistent
application of policy and fair procedures in an
increasingly complex operating environment.
Across recruitment, employee relations, and
HR operations, the DPC continued to support
the organisation through a period of sustained
growth, increased regulatory complexity, and
significant organisational change.

114

Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

Organisational Review
In 2025, the DPC commissioned Indecon to
conduct an independent organisational review
to support ongoing organisational development
and to ensure that structures, governance
arrangements, and ways of working remain fitfor-purpose in the context of the DPC’s expanding
remit and scale of operations.
John Mee (Outhouse LGBTQ+ Centre) presented a talk to the
DPC on the importance of creating safe spaces for LGBTQ+
people in the workplace, June 2025.

Equality, Diversity & Inclusion (EDI)
Committee
The EDI Committee continued to play a central
role in fostering an inclusive and respectful
workplace culture across the DPC in 2025,
supporting the Workforce of the Future pillar of
the Public Service Transformation 2030 Strategy.
Representing staff across the organisation, the
EDI Committee provided a platform for dialogue,
learning, and staff-led initiatives that celebrate
diversity and promote inclusion and belonging.
Throughout the year, the committee worked
closely to deliver a wide range of impactful
initiatives. Awareness and learning were further
promoted through podcasts, workshops and
events. These initiatives included staff-led
discussions, guest speakers from external
organisations such as Outhouse Dublin, Pavee
Point, and Engaging Dementia, and the sharing
of practical resources to support accessibility,
wellbeing and inclusion in the workplace.

The review was designed to provide an objective
assessment of the organisation’s current
operating model, including consideration
of organisational structures, roles and
responsibilities, internal interfaces, and
governance arrangements. It also sought
to identify opportunities to support the
organisation’s continued effectiveness and
resilience as regulatory responsibilities continue
to evolve at both national and EU level.
The review process involved extensive
engagement with staff across the organisation,
including workshops, interviews, and facilitated
engagement sessions in both Dublin and
Portarlington. This engagement provided
an opportunity for staff to contribute their
perspectives and experiences as part of the
review process. The final report was being
drafted at year-end.

The EDI Committee also engaged actively at
organisational level through panel discussions
at Comms Day, participation in the Dublin Pride
Parade, attendance at the National Diversity and
Inclusion Conference, and a fireside chat with
the Public Service EDI Policy Lead. Feedback from
staff throughout the year was overwhelmingly
positive, with many highlighting EDI Committee
initiatives as key moments of learning and
engagement. Collectively, these activities reflect
the EDI Committee’s ongoing commitment to
embedding equality, diversity and inclusion at
the heart of how the DPC works, ensuring all
staff feel supported and valued.
Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

115

Learning, Development, and Wellbeing
During 2025, the DPC continued to invest
in learning and development to support an
engaged, capable, and connected workforce.
A combination of structured development
programmes, bespoke training, and individual
learning pathways was delivered to strengthen
capability across all grades and functions.
Leadership and professional development
remained a key focus. A number of Principal
Officers participated in leadership development
programmes, and a Higher Executive Officer
(HEO) Development Programme was launched
to support the development of future leaders
within the organisation. Individual learning
and development needs were identified
and supported through the Performance
Management and Development System (PMDS).
Participation in learning and development activity
remained strong throughout the year:
•

43 employees were approved for funding
under the Refund of Fees Scheme to pursue
accredited academic qualifications;

•

656 One Learning courses and webinars were
completed by staff; and

•

Funding was provided for 38 short-term and
Continuing Professional Development (CPD)
programmes.

116

In addition to centrally coordinated programmes,
the DPC’s People & Learning team worked closely
with business units to deliver bespoke training
aligned to organisational priorities.
International collaboration continued through
participation in the EDPB secondment
programme. During the year, the DPC hosted
colleagues from Supervisory Authorities in France
and Norway, while one DPC employee undertook
a secondment to Datatilsynet in early 2025. The
DPC also welcomed its first student placement
from the Trinity College Dublin law programme.
Recognising that wellbeing underpins sustainable
performance, a range of wellbeing initiatives
focusing on financial, physical, and mental health
were delivered during the year. These initiatives
support the DPC’s ongoing efforts to build a
resilient, skilled workforce capable of meeting
the demands of an evolving national and EU
regulatory environment.

Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

2025 Gender Pay Gap Report

Enterprise and Operations ICT

The DPC values diversity, equality, and gender
parity in our workplace. It is committed to
fostering an inclusive environment where
everyone has equal opportunities to progress and
succeed. Its 2025 Gender Pay Gap Report reflects
this commitment, outlining its workforce profile
and the ongoing actions it is taking to promote
fairness and reduce pay disparities. This year’s
statistics show continued improvement, with both
the mean and median gender pay gaps narrowing
compared to last year. The DPC remains focused
on supporting balanced representation at all
levels, strengthening recruitment and promotion
practices, and embedding a strong culture
of equality, diversity and inclusion across the
organisation. This report provides a transparent
overview of the DPC’s progress and the measures
in place to further advance gender equity within
the DPC.

The DPC ICT transformation of physical and
digital infrastructure continued in 2025. The
build-out of ICT equipment in the new DPC
Offices on Pembroke Row was completed. This
included the installation of over 200 workstations
and AV equipment in meeting rooms. Work also
began on fitting out a technology lab that will be
used for research and investigatory activities.
During 2025, the onboarding continued of all
regulatory case handling teams onto the DPC’s
new case management system whilst an upgrade
of the system to the latest version was also
delivered. Work also progressed on building a
separate record management system. By yearend all systems were in place to complete the
transformation of users and activities from
legacy systems.

The DPC published its 2025 Gender Pay Gap
Report based on 2024-2025 data with a snapshot
date on 20 June 2025. The report provides an
examination of the reported pay gap and the
steps being taken to address it. At the snapshot
date the DPC had a total of 272 employees with
female employees being 54.40% (147) and male
employees being 45.95% (125).
For the reporting period, the DPC had a mean
gender pay gap of 5.80% in favour of men and a
median pay gap of -0.42% in favour of women.
The DPC is dedicated to continuous progress
on equality, inclusivity, and closing the gender
pay gap. The report reflects the DPC’s sustained
approach, underpinned by national policy and
evolving legislative requirements.
Gender Pay Gap Report

Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

117

Communications
Throughout 2025, the DPC continued promoting
awareness of data protection rights through
effective outreach, stakeholder engagement,
and transparent communication. A core
objective of the DPC is to ensure that individuals
understand their data protection rights and
how they can exercise control over the use of
their personal data.

A New Structure
During 2025 a new DPC communications
structure was introduced, comprising of three
dedicated strands: external communications;
internal communication; and education and
awareness. This audience-focused model has
proven highly effective, enabling clearer, more
targeted communication and strengthening
alignment between communications activity and
organisational objectives.

Communications, Education
and Awareness
External communications activity was strong
throughout 2025, with the DPC responding to a
high volume of national and international media
queries on data protection matters. During the
year, the DPC published 26 news items and
three blog posts and three pieces of guidance
on its website, generating significant coverage
across print, broadcast and online media.

New Guidance produced by the
DPC in 2025
Adult Safeguarding
Toolkit

Short Guide to
Digital Regulation

Strengthening Collaboration
2025 saw the establishment of the DPC
Communications Working Group, a monthly
forum designed to enhance cross-organisational
collaboration. The group has made a valuable
contribution to improving both internal and
external communications, and supporting
ongoing improvements to the DPC website.
Internal Communications Days were a key
highlight of 2025. These off-site away days are
designed to bring staff together from across the
organisation, providing structured opportunities
for networking, knowledge-sharing and
collaboration. This is particularly valuable in the
context of hybrid working arrangements, differing
in-office schedules, and the DPC’s presence
across several geographical locations including
Dublin, Portarlington, and Brussels.

118

Data Protection in
Sport Infographics

Sharenting
Top Tips

Processing Personal Data
During Pre-Enrolment: What
Schools Need to Know

The DPC’s Guide to Handling
of Subject Access Requests

Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

The DPC’s social media platforms continued to
play an important role in raising awareness and
supporting the organisation’s work in 2025.
The DPC expanded its digital presence with
the launch of Bluesky and the relaunch
of Instagram social media accounts, helping
to reach new audiences. Combined follower
numbers increased by over 41,000 during
the year to 93,300, an 80% increase on 2024.
Engagement remained strong on existing
platforms, X and LinkedIn. LinkedIn recorded
an average engagement rate of 9.2% during the
year, reflecting growing public interest in data
protection and the work of the DPC.
Most notably, the Pause Before You Post campaign
page 91-92 which focused on protecting
children’s data rights reached a wide audience
in 2025, generating over 45 million views across
the DPC’s social channels.
A major milestone in 2025 was the
commissioning and publication of a Public
Attitudes Survey. The findings from this poll
offered a clear window into how people perceive
data protection and the role of the DPC. The
results showed a strong public awareness and
a widespread appreciation of the importance of
safeguarding personal information, especially
as new technologies, products, and services
continue to evolve. At the same time, the
survey underscores ongoing concerns about
how organisations handle personal data and
highlights differing expectations across age
groups and regions. The findings from this
research are already informing the organisation’s
engagement and awareness-raising strategy.

70% trust the DPC to uphold
their rights to have their personal
data protected.

61% were concerned with
the use of AI.

More information on the Public Attitudes Survey
can be found on the DPC website.
DPC Public Attitudes
Survey

Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

119

As part of Ireland’s Digital Regulators Group,
the DPC contributed to an important interregulatory education initiative which resulted
in the publication of a Short Guide to Digital
Regulation. This resource was developed to
support public understanding of the digital
regulatory landscape in Ireland, clarifying the
roles and remits of the various regulators and
promoting greater transparency and accessibility
in digital regulation. The guide has performed
very well across the DPC’s social media channels,
with particularly high engagement rate on
LinkedIn of 50.2%.
The DPC also managed and implemented the
design and launch of the Adult Safeguarding
Toolkit, including production of 10 infographics,
as well as an associated press conference and
stakeholder engagement event.
Adult Safeguarding
Toolkit

120

The Case Studies section of the DPC website has
been further developed in close collaboration
with the Applications and Data Team within the
DPC. This upgrade has improved accessibility
and usability for stakeholders.
A new dedicated webpage on the DPC’s website,
providing guidance on the protection of children
was developed and launched, strengthening the
DPC’s online resources in this key area.

DPC Commissioners and staff
contributed to over 100 speaking
engagements during the
year, supporting stakeholder
engagement at both national
and international level.

Guidance on the
Protection of Children

Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

Corporate Governance

Official Languages Act 2003

DPC Audit and Risk Committee

The DPC continues to provide, and improve Irish
language services with enhancements of services.
The DPC’s fifth Language Scheme under the
Official Languages Act 2003 commenced on 21
December 2020 and will remain in effect until the
introduction of language standards following the
Official Languages (Amendment) Act 2021.

In line with the Corporate Governance Standard
for the Civil Service (2015), and also with regard
to the Code of Practice for the Governance of
State Bodies (2016), the DPC established its own
Audit and Risk Committee, as a Committee of
the DPC, effective from 1 January 2020.
The second term of the Audit and Risk Committee
commenced on 1 January 2023 and runs for three
years.

Ethics in Public Office Act 1995 and
Standards in Public Office Act 2001

•

Conan McKenna (chairperson);

•

Aisling McKeon;

The DPC was established under the Data
Protection Act 2018 and operates in accordance
with the provisions of that Act. Measures are in
place to ensure that the staff of the DPC, holding
designated positions, comply with the provisions
of the Ethics in Public Office Act, 1995 and the
Standards in Public Office Act, 2001.

•

Tara McDermott; and

Regulation of Lobbying Act 2015

•

Graham Doyle.

The Lobbying Act 2015 together with its
associated code of conduct, regulations
and guidelines aims to ensure that lobbying
activities are conducted in accordance with
public expectations of transparency. The
Commissioners for Data Protection are
Designated Public Officials (DPOs) under
this Act, as noted on the DPC website.

The members of the Committee are:

Three meetings of the Audit and Risk Committee
were held in 2025.

Internal Audit function
The Internal Audit function in the DPC is provided
by an external service provider who provides
regular reports to the DPC Audit and Risk
Committee on internal audits carried out during
the year.

Interactions between lobbying bodies and
DPOs must be reported by the lobbyists. The
Standards in Public Office Commission (SIPO)
has established an online register of lobbying
at www.lobbying.ie to facilitate this requirement.

Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

121

Engagement with Oireachtas
members

Customer Charter

In accordance with the Department of Public
Expenditure, NDP Delivery and Reform, Circular
25 of 2016, the DPC provides a dedicated mailbox
to address the queries of Oireachtas members
and to receive feedback.

Section 42 of the Irish Human Rights
and Equality Commission Act 2014

The DPC’s Customer Charter and accompanying
Quality Customer Service Action Plan and
Managing Unreasonable Behaviour and Contacts
Policy for 2024–2026 are published on the DPC’s
website. There is a designated customer service
comments mailbox for customers to engage with
the DPC. Any and all comments received are
taken into consideration as part of the on-going
review of delivering quality customer service.

The DPC seeks to meet its obligations under
Section 42 of the Irish Human Rights and Equality
Commission Act 2014 and has put in place
measures to ensure that consideration is given
to human rights and equality in the development
of policies, procedures and engagement with
stakeholders in fulfilling its mandate to protect
the fundamental right to data protection.

Accessibility Officer
To support customers who may require
assistance when engaging with the services
provided by the DPC, the Accessibility Officer
may be contacted via the channels listed on
the DPC website, and in writing to the:
Accessibility Officer,
Data Protection Commission
6 Pembroke Row,
Dublin 2,0
D02 X963,
Ireland
Email: DPCAccessibilityOfficer@dataprotection.ie

122

Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

Freedom of Information Requests
60
50

53

40
30
20
10
0

6
Granted

7
Part
Granted

2
Refused
(OOS)

Withdrawn

0
Live

Freedom of Information (FOI)

Parliamentary Questions (PQs)

In 2025, the DPC received a total of 68 FOI
requests. Six were granted, seven were partially
granted, 53 were deemed out of scope, and two
were deemed withdrawn. The DPC’s regulatory
activity is exempted from FOI requests in order
to preserve the confidentiality of the DPC’s
supervisory, investigatory and enforcement
activities. Nevertheless, the DPC is committed
to providing transparent information to the public
around the administration of its office and use
of public resources.

The DPC was consulted by the Department of
Justice, Home Affairs and Migration in relation to
65 PQs in 2025. The DPC provided observations
in response to 30 of these questions (35 were
not directly applicable to the DPC).

Elected Representative
Correspondence
The DPC received 14 pieces of correspondence
from elected representatives in 2025, across all
business areas.

Access to Information on the
Environment
The DPC received one request in 2025 under
the AIE Regulations.

Human Resources, Communications and Corporate Governance

123

Appendix 1

Appendix 1: Report on Protected
Disclosures Received by the Data
Protection Commission in 2025
The policy operated by the DPC under the terms of the Protected
Disclosures (Amendment) Act 2022 (the Act) is designed to facilitate
and encourage all workers to raise genuine concerns about possible
internal wrongdoing in the workplace with regard to the processing
of personal data and compliance with the data protection legislative
frameworks, so that these concerns can be investigated following the
principles of natural justice and addressed in a manner appropriate
to the circumstances of the case.
Under the Act a ‘worker’ is defined as an
individual working in the private or public
sector who acquired information on relevant
wrongdoings in a work-related context and
includes:
•

Section 22 of the Protected Disclosures Act
2014, substituted by section 30 of the Protected
Disclosures (Amendment) Act 2022, requires
public bodies to prepare and publish, by 01
March in each year, a report in relation to the
previous year in an anonymised form.

employees and former employees;

•

persons who provide or provided services
to another party under contract;

•

agency and former agency workers;

•

board and former board members (including
non-executive members);

•

shareholders and former shareholders;

•

trainees and former trainees;

•

volunteers and former volunteers;

•

job applicants;

•

individuals involved in pre-contract
negotiations; and

•

members and former members of the
Defences Forces (including the Reserves).

Pursuant to this requirement, the DPC confirms
that in 2025:
87 potential protected disclosures (set
out in the graphs below) were received from
individuals external to the DPC in relation to
issues pertaining to data protection within other
entities. These issues were raised with the DPC
in its role as a ‘prescribed person’ as provided for
under section 7 of the Protected Disclosures Act
(listed in SI 367/2020). In addition, one internal
potential protected disclosure was received.

Appendix 1

125

Of the 87 potential protected disclosures:
•

•

28 (32%) of the potential disclosures were
assessed as warranting no further follow-up.

1%

27 (31%) of the potential disclosures were
assessed as warranting further follow-up.

•

17 (20%) of the potential disclosures were
32%
submitted anonymously.

•

14 (16%) were awaiting completion of
assessment at year end as the DPC is awaiting
further information from the reporting person
in order to ensure the report qualifies as a
Protected Disclosure.

•

Outcome of Consideration

16%
32%
20%

31%

Seven potential disclosures submitted on
average per month.
Assessed as warranting no further
follow-up. (28)
Assessed as warranting further
follow-up. (27)
Referred to another more relevant
procedure. (17)
Awaiting completion of assessment
at year end. (14)
Repetitive report containing no
meaningful new information. (1)

126

Appendix 1

Protected Disclosures Received by Month in 2025
14

15

12
10

5

0

9

8
5

9
6

5

5

6

5
3

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Protected Disclosures - Open or Closed
90
80
70
60

58

50
40
30
20
10
0

12

29
Submitted (87)

15

14

Accepted (27)

Under Assessment (14)

Open

Closed

Appendix 1

127

Appendix 2

Appendix 2: Energy Report 2025
Overview of Energy Usage

Portarlington

General

The Portarlington office of the DPC has an area
of 444m2 and is located on the upper floor of a
two-storey building, built in 2006.

The DPC continues to monitor its energy
consumption and ways to assist in the reduction
of energy usage. We continue to participate in
SEAI online monitoring.
The DPC took possession of its new head office
building in January 2025 and finalised the fit out
of the office for staff occupation on the 28 April.
The existing buildings in Fitzwilliam Square and
South Leinster Street were then closed down
and returned to the OPW.
The new head office has a BER rating of A3
and provides 2,481m2 of space compared to
approximately 1,300m2 available between the
Fitzwilliam Square and South Leinster Street
offices.
Note: The final figures for 2024 will not be
available until April 2026, when the figures for
both 2024 and 2025 will become available to
the DPC.

Energy consumption for the office is electricity for
lighting and equipment usage and natural gas for
heating. The energy rating for the building is C1.

Actions undertaken
The DPC participates in the SEAI online system
for the purpose of reporting its energy usage
in compliance with the European Communities
(Energy End-use Efficiency and Energy Services)
Regulations 2009 (S.I. No 542 of 2009).
The energy usage for the office for 2023 (last
validated SEAI figures available) is as follows:
Electrical
Dublin
Fitzwilliam Square
Office.

61,653 kWh

Dublin
6 Pembroke Row

South Leinster
Street Office

76,712 kWh

The new head office of the DPC is located at 6
Pembroke Row, Dublin 2. Energy consumption
for the office is both electricity and gas.

Portarlington

28,400 kWh

As a modern building, the new office is expected
to provide greater energy efficiency compared
to the Georgian building in Fitzwilliam Square
and the South Leinster Street office built in
2010, which had a BER C2 rating. Annual
projected savings for electricity consumption
is 104,000kWhs.

Natural Gas

18,589 kWh

The DPC is undertaking to achieve ISO50001
for the Pembroke Row office.

Appendix 2

129

Overview of Environmental Policy/
Statement for the Organisation
The DPC is committed to operate in line with
Government of Ireland environmental and
sustainability policies.

Reduction of Waste Generated
•

DPC uses a default printer setting to print
documents double-sided;

•

DPC has also introduced dual monitors for
staff to reduce the need to print documents to
review/compare against other documentation
during case work;

Outline of environmental sustainability initiatives
includes:
•

purchase of single use plastics ceased since
January 2019;

•

DPC provides general waste and recycling
bins at stations throughout the offices; and

•

ongoing replacement of fluorescent lighting
with LED lighting in Portarlington office as
units fail or require replacement bulbs;

•

DPC has signed up for use of brown food
waste bins.

•

installation of sensor lights in refurbished
area of Portarlington office;

•

sensor lighting in use in South Leinster
Street office;

•

introduction of government energy
conservation plans; and

•

sensor lighting introduced in bathrooms
Portarlington Office.

Maximisation of Recycling
DPC policy is to securely shred all waste paper.
Consoles are provided at multiple locations
throughout the offices. Shredded paper is
recycled.

Sustainable Procurement
PC procurements and processes are fully
compliant with sustainable procurement.
Catering contracts stipulate the exclusion
of single use plastics.

Green Team
The DPC has reconstituted its Green Team
with training provided to all 11 members.

130

Appendix 2

Appendix 3

Appendix 3: Statement
of Internal Controls
DPC Statement of Internal Controls the Financial Statement
of the Data Protection Commission for the year 1 January
2025 to 31 December 2025 and its Statement of Internal
Controls for the same period are in preparation by the
DPC and will be appended to this report following the
completion of an audit in respect of 2025 by the
Comptroller and Auditor General.

132

Appendix 3

Index
A

G

Access: 20, 21, 28, 31, 37, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 50,
52, 53, 54, 55, 64, 66, 67, 74, 78, 83, 96

Governance: 16, 81, 83, 89, 105, 106, 115

Access Request: 28, 50, 52, 53, 54, 55, 64, 67

L

Article 60: 7, 31, 39, 45, 48, 55, 60, 100
Artificial Intelligence: 80

Law Enforcement Directive: 13, 24, 31, 32,
37, 99

B

LED: 13, 17, 24, 31, 32, 130

Breach: 4, 6, 19, 20, 21, 35, 36, 37, 41, 42, 43, 44,
50, 53, 57, 69, 102

N
Notification: 20, 37, 43, 44, 51, 102

C
CCTV: 20, 27, 56, 79, 80
Cross-border: 2, 13, 25, 30, 45, 48, 99, 101, 104

D
Data Controller: 28, 32, 50, 62, 72
Decision: 16, 22, 32, 39, 44, 45, 53, 55, 62, 64, 65,
66, 68, 69, 84

P
Personal Data: 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 13, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 31, 32, 35, 37, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44,
46, 47, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 60, 61, 62, 67, 68, 69, 71,
73, 74, 76, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 87, 88, 91,
92, 93, 94, 96, 99, 109, 118, 119, 125
Processing: 17, 20, 32, 79, 80, 118

Disclosure: 32, 37, 42, 44, 53, 81, 125

R

DPO: 2, 20, 35, 44, 96, 97

Request: 9, 19, 20, 21, 23, 28, 50, 52, 53, 54

E
Electronic Direct Marketing: 29
Employee: 21, 27, 62, 114, 116
Erasure: 21, 23, 25, 28, 50, 51, 52, 54, 108
Erasure Request: 28, 50, 52
European Union: 46, 60, 72, 73, 89, 99, 103

F
Financial: 21, 35, 96, 116

Resolution: 20, 22, 31, 80
Right: 2, 4, 5, 11, 13, 16, 21, 22, 23, 25, 31, 47,
49, 53, 54, 67, 75, 77, 82, 87, 105, 106, 107, 108,
112, 122
Rights: 3, 10, 13, 20, 21, 24, 25, 32, 35, 47, 49, 50,
52, 53, 54, 66, 71, 73, 74, 80, 87, 92, 94, 102, 118,
119, 122

T
Transparency: 21, 41, 47, 51, 54, 74, 82, 84, 85,
86, 89, 104, 120, 121

Index

133

Notes

134

Notes

Notes

Notes

135

Notes

136

Notes

Appendix 3

137

Data Protection Commission
6 Pembroke Row
Dublin 2
D02 X963
Ireland
(01) 765 01 00
1800 437 737
www.dataprotection.ie

138

Litigation

Annual Report 2025

