Annual
Report
2024

PAGE 1

PAGE 2

Glossary
CSA

Concerned Supervisory Authority

DPA

Data Protection Authority

DPC

Data Protection Commission

DPO

Data Protection Officer

EDPB

European Data Protection Board

GDPR

General Data Protection Regulation

IMI

Internal Market Information System

LED

Law Enforcement Directive

LSA

Lead Supervisory Authority

OSS

One Stop Shop

SMC

Senior Management Committee

AI

Artificial Intelligence

PAGE 3

CONTENTS

Contents
Foreword

4

Timeline of 2024

8

Executive Summary

10

Mission, Vision and Values at the DPC

14

1. Roles and Responsibilities

17

2. Contacts, Queries & Complaints

20

3. Breaches

32

4. Decisions and Inquiries

35

5. Litigation

60

6. Supervision

71

7. Children’s Data Protection Rights

90

8. Data Protection Officers

95

9. International Activities

100

10. Human Resources, Communications and
Corporate Governance

109

Appendix 1: Report on Protected Disclosures received
by the Data Protection Commission in 2024

114

Appendix 2: Report on Energy Usage at the
Data Protection Commission

120

Appendix 3: Statement of Internal Controls

123

Index

125

PAGE 4

FOREWORD

Foreword
The Data Protection Commission’s (DPC) regulation of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) model training attracted a lot of public
interest in 2024, but the Commission was active on several
other fronts during what proved to be a very busy year.
•
•
•

•

•

•

Four large scale inquiries were brought to a conclusion;
Inquiries concluded into CCTV usage and data
breaches on the domestic front;
New inquiries were commenced into issues concerning
AI models, biometrics, and the security of sensitive
health data;
Follow-up enforcement actions against two large
technology platforms resulted in improved outcomes
for children’s personal data;
A harmonised Europe-wide position was reached by
the end of the year on how to comply with the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) when developing
and deploying AI; and
A range of other activities were also undertaken in the
performance of our mandate.

This work and the results achieved in 2024, documented
in this report, were made possible by the efforts and
commitment of the DPC’s staff. The year saw the DPC’s
workforce increase from 210 in January 2024 to 251 by
December as our workload also expanded. Further staff
increases will be required to meet the increased demands
of implementing the GDPR and the EU Digital rulebook.

rights for individuals. When interpreted and applied in
a balanced and proportionate manner that respects the
essence of the right to data protection, the GDPR facilitates
responsible and safe processing, and free flow of personal
data which is vital for sustainable growth and prosperity in
societal and economic terms.
The DPC aims to promote responsible personal data use
and to foster innovation in its role both as Ireland’s Data
Protection Authority and the EU Lead Supervisory Authority
(LSA) in cases where a company has its main establishment
in Ireland. Through our Supervision and Engagement
function, the DPC regularly engages with commercial
organisations prior to market launch, as well as with public
sector bodies developing and deploying public services,
and shaping new legislation. The GDPR gives organisations
the freedom to shape the specifics of their approach to
meeting data protection obligations, but it also requires
organisations to be accountable for their choices both
to individuals and regulators. Proactive engagement and
intervention can mitigate data protection risks and harms
to individuals as well as ensuring that personal data is used
in ways that are responsible, lawful and people-centred
without giving carte blanche or advance approval of plans to
any organisation.

Protecting our personal data
When fellow Commissioner Dale Sunderland and I took
up office in February 2024, we laid a significant emphasis
on the DPC’s values as we engaged with the organisations
we regulate, with our stakeholders and with our peer
regulators. Internally, those values entail focusing on how
DPC colleagues respect and support each other; externally,
we acknowledge the values the DPC should exhibit as a
regulator - fairness, consistency and transparency – and
these should be inherent as we go about our work.

Fast paced evolving AI developments
There are potentially immense benefits to society arising
from AI technologies but it is critical that new technological
developments are introduced in a way that protects
individuals, especially children and the vulnerable,
from harm. As the European LSA for a number of large
technology, social media and internet platform companies,
the DPC engaged intensively throughout 2024 with a range
of companies developing Large Language Models (LLMs).
We made interventions in a number cases where the
DPC identified deficiencies and failures in plans to train AI
models using personal data of EU/ EEA citizens which could
expose users to significant risks and harms.

The EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and the GDPR
establish the protection of personal data as a fundamental
right and core value of the European Union. This right
applies regardless of whom is processing our personal
data - an individual, a Government agency or a private
company. The GDPR has now been in force for seven years,
and it continues to be the standard and benchmark for
organisations, setting the guardrails for responsible, ethical
and lawful use of personal data, and establishing strong

In order to bring greater clarity to the application of
data protection requirements in AI model training and
deployment, and to reach a harmonised EU position and
level playing field for industry, the DPC for the first time
requested a statutory opinion from the European Data
Protection Board (EDPB) on AI model development.
This initiative saw EU/ EEA regulators work intensively
together in the EDPB over a 14-week period to achieve
a unified position in December 2024.

L - R Commissioner Chair Dr Des Hogan and Commissioner Dale Sunderland

PAGE 5

PAGE 6

National and EU cooperation
In order to deepen engagement with our peer European
and international data protection and privacy authorities,
the DPC appointed a Deputy Commissioner responsible for
EDPB and international affairs to lead DPC work in this area.
In the context of EU Digital legislation being introduced, the
DPC appointed a Deputy Commissioner to head a new
inter-regulatory cooperation function with the aim of
deepening engagement with both national and EU
level regulators in other regulatory spheres. New digital
legislation is intended to take effect without prejudice to the
GDPR thereby creating an imperative for data protection
authorities to work more closely and effectively with other
digital regulators. Ireland’s Digital Regulators Group is a
good and effective example of this concept working in
practice. Despite bringing additional complexity and volume
to the DPC’s workload, inter-regulatory cooperation has
been set as a DPC priority in the interests of regulatory
clarity and consistency.
Following the introduction of the EU AI Act during the year,
the DPC was designated by Ireland as a fundamental rights
body under the new legislation and it is also proposed that
it will have a role as a market surveillance authority. New
functions were also given to data protection authorities
under the EU Political Advertising Regulation adopted in
March 2024 which will give the DPC an important role in
ensuring that during elections personal data is only used
for advertising in accordance with the Regulation.
In addition, negotiations on the EU’s Procedural
Harmonisation Regulation on the GDPR continued,
aimed at streamlining cross-border complaint-handling
and investigation processes.
In recognition of the DPC’s European-wide responsibilities
as an LSA, the resourcing of the DPC has been
consistently supported by the Government. In light
of new responsibilities and a significantly additional
workload for the DPC as a result of the AI Act and other
digital regulations, as well as the already substantial and
increasing workload associated with our EU lead authority
role and across all functions more generally, it is critical
that we continue to receive funding increases enabling the
expansion of our workforce. The Government’s continuing
support will be critical to the DPC’s ability to meet its EUwide responsibilities and the delivery of effective regulation
in support of the digital economy.
Helping individuals and organisations
During the year, the DPC continued to experience a
high level of data protection concerns and complaints
submitted by individuals to the DPC, which the office dealt
with as expeditiously as possible. We continued to seek
early resolutions of issues in the interest of the individuals
concerned but also issued enforcement orders in cases
where the organisations concerned did not respond in a
satisfactory manner. Prosecutions taken under the E-privacy
regulations for unsolicited marketing emails were an
example of this.

FOREWORD

Organisations also contacted the DPC looking for practical
assistance which we provided through guidance
and engagement.
Data breach notifications rose 11% during 2024. As set
out in the report, the role of, and value placed on, the
Data Protection Officer (DPO) in organisations is central to
assisting the organisation to meet its GDPR obligations. The
DPO is an independent role in gatekeeping data protection
standards in organisations, and the extent to which a DPO
is resourced and to whom they report internally can tell
the regulator much about an organisation’s approach to
data protection. In November, the DPC hosted its DPO
network conference in Croke Park which provided a forum
for data protection professionals working in large and small
organisations to share insights and challenges.
Cross Border Inquiries and other enforcement
Enforcement is a central element of the regulatory
environment that can achieve real outcomes and
protections for individuals and, as such, works in parallel
with the DPC’s guidance, engagement and preventative
work. This report details the conclusion of four large-scale
cross-border inquiries in 2024 with no objections being
raised by our peer DPA colleagues. In addition, three
national inquiries were concluded. During the year, the DPC
also commenced three new inquiries into Google (AI model
training), the HSE (safety of sensitive personal data) and
Ryanair (use of biometric data), responding both to concerns
identified by the DPC and to complaints from other parties.
The year also saw the DPC follow up on earlier Inquiry
decisions into the use of children’s personal data. In
inquiries related to TikTok and Instagram (see Annual
Report 2023), the DPC had specified corrective measures
it required the companies involved to address as part
of the Inquiry findings. Notwithstanding the fact that the
companies were appealing these decisions, the corrective
measures orders continued to have effect and the DPC
monitored enforcement of these, leading to successful
outcomes including children’s personal data now being
set as private rather than public by default. This is an
important measure to safeguard children from identity
theft, impersonation and exposure to various forms of
harmful interaction.
Guidance and standard setting
Giving guidance and setting data protection standards –
both nationally and with international peer regulators – is an
important function of a data protection authority. In 2024
the DPC provided observations on 56 pieces of proposed
legislation. The Commission also progressed a number of
important sectoral engagements. It is incumbent upon the
regulator to listen to and understand sectoral concerns and
challenges which data protection obligations can present, as
we wish to encourage data protection as an enabler of safe
and responsible data use. Acknowledging the challenge for
schools, particularly small primary schools, to understand
their data protection obligations, we published a Schools

FOREWORD

Toolkit in December having consulted with stakeholders in
the education sector.
The DPC worked closely with a number of organisations
involved in adult safeguarding during the year to
understand their concerns, and we drafted guidance to
assist these groups in implementing robust data protection
safeguards whilst ensuring that barriers to identifying and
responding to safeguarding concerns were minimised.
The DPC also surveyed sports organisations and retailers
during the year and we plan further outreach to organising
bodies and stakeholders to improve awareness and data
protection compliant practices in these sectors.
The GDPR is working well and is standing the test of time,
but we must not lose sight of its essence which is to ensure
that the individual right to data protection is respected
and individuals do not suffer risks and harms as a result of
their personal data being improperly used. As we seek to
ensure the GDPR remains central in the development of new
technologies, which will become increasingly commonplace
in the public sector as well as the private sector, the DPC
is committed to fair, proportionate, clear and consistent
regulation to deliver real benefits and safeguards for
individuals, whilst enabling responsible and people-centred
innovation.

Dr. Des Hogan
Chairperson,
Commissioner for Data Protection

PAGE 7

PAGE 8

TIMELINE OF 2024

Timeline of 2024

Q1
Q2

DPC publishes New Guidance on Managing
your Digital Footprint

Changing of the Guard! Following Helen Dixon
departure from the DPC after two five year
terms, Dr. Des Hogan and Dale Sunderland
commence their roles as Commissioners of
the DPC

DPC commence inquiry into the HSE
concerning the storage and retention of
personal data

Following DPC engagement, Meta pauses plans
to train LLM using public content shared by
adults on Facebook and Instagram

Q3

DPC publishes new blog guidance AI, LLMs and
Data Protection

Following DPC High Court enforcement,
X (Formerly Twitter) agrees to suspend its
processing of personal data for the purpose of
training AI tool “Grok”

DPC inquiry concludes, fines Meta Platforms
Ireland €91 million

TIMELINE OF 2024

Q3
Q4

PAGE 9

Inquiry into Google AI Model launched by DPC

DPC requests an Article 64.2 opinion from the
EDPB on the use of personal data for
the development and deployment of
Artificial Intelligence (“AI”) models.

DPC inquiry concludes with correct measures,
fines LinkedIn €310 million

DPC hosts the “Support DPO Success”
Conference in Croke Park, Dublin

DPC inquiry concludes, fines Meta Platforms
Ireland €251 million

Publishing new guidance “Data Protection
Toolkit for Schools”

DPC welcomes EDPB Opinion on the
use of personal data for the development
and deployment of Artificial Intelligence
(“AI”) models.

PAGE 10

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Executive Summary
From 1 January 2024 to 31 December 2024 the DPC:

Received over

Received

32,000

24,306

Contacts

electronic contacts 1

6,751

1,095

phone calls

postal contacts

Processed

Resolved

11,091 10,510
new cases

cases

2,357
progressed through the formal complaint-handling process.

1

Electronic communications comprise both emails to the DPC’s info@
account and webforms submitted through the DPC website.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

PAGE 11

Total valid breach notifications received by the DPC in 2024 was

7,781

Of those breach notifications
received in 2024

81%

an eleven percent (11%)
increase on 2023

were concluded by year end

50%

of notified cases arose as a
result of correspondence
being sent to the wrong
recipient

DPC Inquiries and Decisions in 2024:
Issued over

€652
million in
administrative fines

4

89

Large Scale
Inquiries
concluded

Statutory Inquiries
on-hand as of
31 December

4

7

11 115

Preliminary
Draft
Decisions

Draft
Decisions

Finalised
Decisions

notifications
of amicable
resolutions

PAGE 12

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

In 2024 the DPC announced the commencement on new national and cross-border
inquiries into

Artificial
Intelligence
models

Biometrics

Security of sensitive
health data
Follow-up enforcement actions with companies arising from previous cross-border
inquiries resulted in

Improved outcomes for
children’s personal data
and safety
Since 1 January 2024 the DPC:
Received

Participated in over

GDPR Article 61 Mutual and
Voluntary Mutual Requests for
assistance from other European
Regulators

European Data Protection
Board (EDPB) meetings

1,175

180

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

PAGE 13

Provided input and observations on

56

pieces of proposed legislation

The lead SA reviewing

16
11

Binding Corporate
Rules (BCR) applications
for

Different companies

Introduced

2

New Functions
Inter-Regulatory Affairs
EDPB & International Affairs

146

Electronic direct
marketing investigations
resulted in

Produced
data protection
toolkit for schools

80
Speaking events

8

Companies
prosecuted

DPC spearheaded
questions to EDPB
regarding:

AI Opinion

PAGE 14

MISSION, VISION AND VALUES AT THE DPC

Mission, Vision and Values at the DPC
Mission
Upholding the consistent application of data protection law through engagement,
supervision and enforcement, and driving compliance with data protection
legislation. The DPC safeguards the data protection rights of individuals and
provides clarity for the organisations it regulates by:
• Educating stakeholders on their rights and responsibilities;
• Taking a fair and balanced approach to complaint handling;
• Communicating extensively and transparently with stakeholders;
• Participating actively at European Data Protection Board level to achieve
		consistency;
• Cultivating technological foresight, in anticipation of future regulatory 		
		developments;
• Sanctioning proportionately and judiciously; and
• Retaining and amalgamating the expert capacities of its staff to ensure
operational effectiveness.

Vision
The DPC is committed to being an independent, internationally influential and
publicly dependable regulator of EU data protection law; regulating with clear
purpose, trusted by the public, respected by our peers and effective in our
regulation. The DPC will play a leadership role in bringing legal clarity to the early
years of the General Data Protection Regulation. The DPC will apply a risk- based
regulatory approach to its work, so that its resources are always prioritised on
the basis of delivering the greatest benefit to the maximum number of people.
The DPC will also be a rewarding and challenging place to work, with a focus on
retaining, attracting and allocating the most appropriate people to deliver on its
mandate, recognising the value and capacities of its staff as its most critical asset.

Values
The DPC is an autonomous regulator, with responsibility for regulating both
private and public sector organisations, as well as safeguarding the data
protection rights of individuals. In the conduct of these duties, the DPC is
committed to act always in a way that is: Fair, Expert, Consistent, Transparent,
Accountable, Forward Looking, Engaged, Independent and Results-driven.

We are always
Fair
Expert
Consistent
Transparent
Accountable
Forward Looking
Engaged
Independent
Results-driven

MISSION, VISION AND VALUES AT THE DPC

Regulatory Strategy
In December 2021, the DPC published its Regulatory Strategy for 2022-2027,
which is the roadmap for the DPC to deliver on its mandate to uphold the
fundamental right to data protection.  The Strategy – and the work that flows
from it – has been based around five interconnected pillars of equal priority.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Regulate consistently and effectively
Safeguard individuals and promote data
protection awareness
Prioritise the protection of children and other vulnerable groups
Bring clarity to stakeholders
Support organisations and drive compliance.

The Strategy is arranged according to fundamental goals, underpinned by the
DPC’s mission, vision and values, which collectively contribute to the delivery of its
strategic priorities. In late 2024, the DPC commenced a mid-point re-evaluation
of its Regulatory Strategy. This re-evaluation will conclude in 2025.

PAGE 15

1
PAGE 16

Roles and Responsibilities

ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

PAGE 17

Roles and Responsibilities
Functions of the DPC

The DPC is the national independent authority in Ireland responsible for
upholding the fundamental right of EU persons to have their personal
data protected. Accordingly, the DPC is the Irish supervisory authority
tasked with monitoring the application of the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) (Regulation (EU) 2016/679)). The DPC also has
functions relating to other regulatory frameworks, including the Irish
ePrivacy Regulations (2011) and the EU Directive known as the Law
Enforcement Directive (LED). The statutory functions of the DPC are as
established under the Data Protection Act 2018, which gives further effect
to the GDPR and to the LED.
The right to the protection of one’s personal data is set
out in EU law in the EU Treaties and in the EU Charter of
Fundamental Rights. In 2016, the EU adopted a new legal
framework in the GDPR to give effect to this right. The
core functions of the DPC, under the GDPR and the Data
Protection Act 2018 include:
•

driving improved compliance with data protection
legislation by controllers and processors;

•

handling complaints from individuals in relation to
potential infringements of their data protection rights;

•

conducting inquiries and investigations into potential
infringements of data protection legislation;

•

promoting awareness among organisations and
the public of the risks, rules, safeguards and rights
incumbent in the processing of personal data;

•

co-operating with data protection authorities in other
EU Member States on mutual issues, involving crossborder processing of personal data and

•

to act as EU Lead Supervisory Authority for data
controllers with their main establishment in Ireland.

LED applies to the processing of personal data by bodies
with law-enforcement functions in the context of the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of

criminal offences or execution of criminal penalties. The
ePrivacy Regulations concern the processing of personal
data in the context of electronic communications such as
electronic direct marketing.
In addition to its functions under the GPDR, the DPC
continues to perform its regulatory functions under the
Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003, in respect of
complaints and investigations that relate to the period
before 25 May 2018 (when the GDPR came into force),
as well as in relation to certain limited other categories
of processing, irrespective of whether that processing
occurred before or after 25 May 2018.

Funding and Administration – Vote 44

The DPC is funded by the Exchequer and does not derive
monetary gain from fines imposed.  The Chairperson of the
Commission is the Accounting Officer for the Commission’s
Vote – Vote 44.
The DPC’s 2024 estimate provision was €28.126M of which
€18.862M was allocated for pay related expenditure, and
€9.439M of which was allocated to non-pay expenditure.
The funding for 2024 represented an increase of €2.047M
on the 2023 allocation.

PAGE 18

ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

The DPC Senior Management Team from left to right: Cian O’Brien, David Murphy, Dr Des Hogan, Jennifer Dolan, MB Donnelly, Diarmuid Goulding,
Dale Sunderland, Ultan O’Carroll, Gráinne Duffy, Elizabeth Finn, Graham Doyle, Fleur O’Shea, Cathal Ryan, Ian Chambers, Labhras Sammin, Andrew Carroll,
Gráinne Hawkes, Niall Cavanagh.

DPC’s Senior Team

•

Graham Doyle, Deputy Commissioner, Head of
Corporate Affairs, Media & Communications;

•

Gráinne Duffy, Deputy Commissioner, Head of People
and Learning;

•

Elizabeth Finn, Deputy Commissioner, Head of Cross
Border Complaints & & Inquiries;

•

Diarmuid Goulding, Deputy Commissioner, Head of
Large Scale Inquiries & Investigations Team 3;

•

Gráinne Hawkes, Deputy Commissioner, Head of EDPB/
International Affairs & AI Act;

•

David Murphy, Deputy Commissioner, Head of
Consultation & Supervision Team 1;

•

Ultan O’Carroll, Deputy Commissioner, Head of
Regulatory Technology Affairs;

•

Andrew Carroll, Deputy Commissioner, Head of Large
Scale Inquiries & Investigations Team 2;

Fleur O’Shea, Deputy Commissioner, Head of
Legal Affairs;

•

Niall Cavanagh, Deputy Commissioner, Head of Large
Scale Inquiries & Investigations Team 1;

Cathal Ryan, Deputy Commissioner, Head of
Consultation & Supervision Team 2;

•

Ian Chambers, Deputy Commissioner, Head of
Frontline, Breach, Complaints and Information;

Labhras Sammin, Deputy Commissioner, Head of
Enterprise & ICT Operations; and

•

Sandra Skehan, Deputy Commissioner, Head of
National Complaint Handling & Inquiries including
Access Requests, LED, Breach & Processing.

The DPC’s Senior Management Committee (SMC) comprises
the Commissioners for Data Protection, Director and
Principal Officers.
The Commissioners and members of the SMC oversee the
proper management and governance of the organisation, in
line with the principles set out in the Corporate Governance
Standard for the Civil Service (2015).
During 2024, the SMC comprised:
•
Dr Des Hogan Chairperson, Commissioner for Data
Protection (from February 2024);
•

Dale Sunderland, Commissioner for Data Protection
(from February 2024);

•

Cian O’Brien, Director and Deputy Commissioner
with responsibility for Large-Scale Inquiries including
Investigations & Cross Border Complaints;

•
•
•
•

Jennifer Dolan, Deputy Commissioner, Head of Inter
Regulatory Affairs & E-Privacy Prosecutions;

•

MB Donnelly, Deputy Commissioner, Head of Strategy,
Governance, Finance and Risk;

* Former Commissioner for Data Protection, Helen Dixon,
was a member of the SMC until February 2024.

2

Contacts, Queries
& Complaints

PAGE 19

PAGE 20

CONTACTS, QUERIES & COMPLAINTS

Contacts, Queries & Complaints
Individuals and organisations contact the DPC in a variety of ways,
including the DPC Helpdesk phone lines, online web forms, email
and post.

Contacts
Received
2024

Postal contacts
1,095
Phone calls
6,761

Electronic contacts 2
24,306

Contacts/Queries
Between 1 January 2024 and 31 December 2024:
The DPC received over 32,000 contacts. This figure consists
of 24,306 electronic contacts1 6,751 phone calls and 1,095
postal contacts.
The cases raised with the DPC reflect common challenges
that individuals face when exercising their data protection
rights. Subject Access Requests (SARs) dominate the list,
whether due to non-response or dissatisfaction with the
response provided by the organisation in question.
Concerns relating to consent, personal data disclosure, and
domestic CCTV highlight the public’s continuing awareness
of data protection issues in both personal and
organisational contexts.
When individuals contact the DPC raising a concern, the
DPC generally engages directly with the organisation whose
behaviour is at issue, specifically the organisation’s Data
Protection Officer (DPO) where one has been appointed.
This engagement typically leads to resolution without
requiring further intervention by the DPC. In situations
where escalation is necessary, it is invaluable for the DPC
to have access to written correspondence between the
1 Electronic communications comprise both emails to the DPC’s info@ account
and webforms submitted through the DPC website.

individual and the organisation that details the issue and
the positions of both parties. This documentation helps
streamline the assessment of a matter raised by
an individual.
The DPC strives to ensure that individuals are supported
in understanding their rights under the GDPR, while also
encouraging organisations to be transparent and accountable
in their data processing activities. In resolving cases the DPC
often reviews an organisations compliance efforts.
The DPC provides a dedicated telephone service for the
public’s queries about data protection. The information desk
serves primarily as a resource for clarifying basic queries.
For complex or complaint-related issues, individuals and
organisations are advised to submit their concerns in writing
via email to info@dataprotection.ie or by post to:
6 Pembroke Row, Dublin 2, D02 X963, Ireland
Additionally, individuals who face barriers in contacting the
DPC in writing can avail of the DPC Accessibility Officer’s
support at: DPCAccessibilityOfficer@dataprotection.ie
This ensures that the DPC’s services remain inclusive and
accessible to all.

CONTACTS, QUERIES & COMPLAINTS

PAGE 21

In 2024, the Top 5 queries received
through Electronic and Postal
contacts were
Non-response to
Subject Access
Request

Consent as legal
basis to process
personal data

Domestic
CCTV

Further process of
personal data by an
organisation

How to make a
Subject Access
Request

Top 5 queries to the DPC Telephone
Information desk
General guidance
regarding GDPR
legislation

Domestic
CCTV

Concerns regarding
the processing of
personal data

How to submit
a breach
notification

Guidance on how
to make a Subject
Access Request

PAGE 22

CONTACTS, QUERIES & COMPLAINTS

Complaints
During 2024, the DPC received 11,091 new cases1 . 2,673 of
which progressed to the formal complaint-handling process,
including 194 electronic direct marketing complaints.
Overall, the DPC concluded 2,357 formal complaints in
2024, including 1,367 complaints received prior to 2024. In
addition to 8,418 cases resolved though amicable means.

Complaint Handling
The DPC processes complaints under four main
legal frameworks:
a.

b.

c.
d.

Concluded Complaints

the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which
has been given further effect by the Data Protection Act
2018 (2018 Act);
the Law Enforcement Directive (LED), which has been
transposed into Irish law by Parts 5 and 6 of the 2018
Act;
the Data Protection Acts, 1988 and 2003; and/or
S.I. 336/2011 – European Communities (Electronic
Communications Networks and Services) (Privacy and
Electronic Communications) Regulations 2011.

Includes 1,367 complaints received prior to 2024.
Total complaints received
11,091

Formal
complaints
2,357

Amicable
Resolutions
8,418

Top 3 Issues in complaints
received under the GDPR
(65% of overall cases)

% of
total

Subject Access Request

34

Fair Processing

17

Right to Erasure

14

Complaints are assessed to determine if the issue is a
complaint as defined under the Acts (namely that the matter
relates to the processing of the individual’s personal data
and that there has been an infringement of the individual’s
data protection rights). The DPC must also assess whether
the DPC is the appropriate authority to examine the
complaint or if the complaint falls under the remit of
another data protection regulator.

1  Cases are defined as contacts that require further engagement beyond
the initial query. Cases in this instance can therefore include complaints
from individuals, but also encompasses requests for advice and guidance

which do not have a complaint element. The figure does not include
contacts from the media, speaking invitations, breach notifications or prior
consultation.

CONTACTS, QUERIES & COMPLAINTS

Access Rights
Article 15 of the GDPR provides that an individual may
obtain from an organisation sufficient, transparent and
easily accessible information about the processing of their
personal data so that they can be aware of and verify
the lawfulness of the processing and the accuracy of the
processed data. This is an important right which gives rise
to the largest number of national complaints to the DPC
annually, accounting for over thirty four per cent (34%) of
all complaints.
Under Article 15 of the GDPR, sets out the obligations
organisations must comply with upon receipt of a subject
access request. Article 15 essentially comprises of eight
different elements as listed to the right.

PAGE 23

Subject Request Obligations
1.

Confirmation as to whether or not the organisation
is processing personal data concerning you.

2.

Access to your personal data.

3.

Access to the following information on the
processing:
a. the purposes of the processing of your
personal data;
b. the categories of your personal data;
c.

Largest share of
national complaints

the recipients or categories of recipients of
your personal data;

d. the envisaged duration of the processing or
the criteria for determining the duration;
e. the existence of your right to rectification,

Right to request suﬃcient, transparent and
easily accessible information about the
processing of personal data (GDPR Article 15)

erasure, restriction of processing and objection
to processing;
f.

the right to lodge a complaint with a
supervisory authority;

Access
Requests

g.

any available information on the source of your
personal data, if not collected from you;

h. the existence of automated decision-making,
including profiling and other information

34%

relating thereto.
4.

Information on safeguards pursuant to Art. 46
where your personal data is transferred to a third
country or to an international organisation.

5.

The obligation of the organisation to provide a copy
of your personal data undergoing processing.

Non Access
Requests

6.

Charging of a reasonable fee by the organisation
based on administrative costs for any further copies
requested by the you.

7.

Provision of information in electronic form.

8.

Taking into account the rights and freedoms of
others (Article 15(4) restriction).

PAGE 24

By the end of 2024, the DPC had received 914 new complaints
solely related to the right to access and concluded 904.
The failure of organisations to reply to individuals regarding
their subject access request within the required timeframe,
combined with the application of redactions or exemptions
by the organisation, accounts for many of the complaints
received by the DPC.
While the redactions or exemptions are for the most part
appropriately applied, the complaints stem from insufficient
explanations by the data controller as to why they are
being applied. It is not sufficient for an organisation to
merely itemise the exemptions, restrictions or relevant
articles of the legislation. The reason the exemption is being
applied should be clearly explained to the individual. Any
exemptions applied should be documented, for example,
in the form of a table. Organisations must always be able to
explain to the DPC why they have applied
specific exemptions.
Accordingly, issues arise where the organisation does not:
•
Respond to the individual in relation to the subject
access request within one-month of receipt of the
request or within two further months if there is a
delay, and the reason for the delay is explained to the
individual; and/or
•
Explain clearly to the individual why the data requested
cannot be released to them
For further information on handling subject access requests,
organisations should review the DPC Guidance here:
Subject Access Requests: A Data Controller’s Guide QR 1

CONTACTS, QUERIES & COMPLAINTS

Erasure requests
The right to have your personal data deleted is also known
as the “right to erasure” or the “right to be forgotten”.
This is not an absolute right and only applies in specific
circumstances including when:

Right To Erasure
Circumstances
•

The organisation no longer needs your data
for the original reason they collected or used
it for.

•

You initially consented to the organisation
using your data, but have now withdrawn your
consent and where there is no other legal
ground for the processing.

•

You have objected to the use of your data,
and your interests outweigh those of the
organisation using it.

•

The organisation has collected or used your
data unlawfully.

•

The organisation has a legal obligation to
erase your data.

•

The data was collected from you as a child for
an online service.

QR 1
Erasure requests account for an increasingly large volume
of complaints to the DPC, which stood at fourteen percent
(14%) of complaints submitted. The majority of cases that
come before the DPC arise because the organisation in
question did not respond to the request in a timely manner
and/or did not clarify with the individual the reasoning as to
why the right to erasure was not applicable in the specific

CONTACTS, QUERIES & COMPLAINTS

circumstances. The DPC has seen an increase in the number
of complaints submitted relating to erasure requests
related to medical data. The DPC published a detailed
FAQ related to this topic in an effort to assist individuals in
understanding, in particular, why the erasure of medical
data is particularly problematic (see link below).
Reasons for refusing an erasure request may include:
•
Exercising the right of freedom of expression and
information;
•
Complying with a legal obligation or for the
performance of a task carried out in the public interest
or where processing is required as part of   the official
authority assigned to the organisation;
•
Public interest in the area of public health;
•
Archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or
historical research purposes or statistical purposes;
and/or
•
Establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims.
An organisation must be able to clearly and concisely
explain to an individual why their personal data cannot be
erased and for how long the organisation will continue to
process the personal data in question.
The more effective the communication between an
individual and organisation, the more likely it is to result in
complaints being resolved prior to the DPC’s involvement, or
through the amicable resolution process facilitated by
the DPC.
Further guidance on erasure is available at
12 Steps to GDPR Compliance QR 2
Amending or Erasing Medical Records QR 3
QR 2

QR 3

PAGE 25

Complaint Outcomes
In accordance with section 109 of the 2018 Act, the
DPC will take such actions as it considers appropriate
in relation to a complaint, which are the rejection or
dismissal of a complaint, the issuing of an enforcement
notice, the commencement of a complaint based inquiry,
the issuing of a reprimand or any other action the DPC
considers appropriate.
In 2024, the DPC continued to receive a large volume of
complaints, with amicable resolution continuing to be an
effective means to resolve complaints. The DPC encourages
organisations to engage in a meaningful way with the
process in the interest of achieving early outcomes for
the complainants concerned.
Enforcement
The DPC utilises its powers of enforcement against
an organisation when it becomes apparent that the
organisation is failing in its obligations under data
protection legislation. The most common example is
where an organisation does not engage at all with
either the individual or the DPC.
The DPC issued eight Enforcement Notices throughout
2024. The majority of notices relate to non-response to
access requests.
In 2024, the DPC conducted a number of site visits related
to small enterprises to engage with the organisations to
remind them of their GDPR obligations and point them
towards guidance available from the DPC and other sources.
This has proven to be very productive in terms of resolving
matters expeditiously. It also allows information regarding
data protection obligations to be provided in a cooperative
and supportive manner.
Complaint case studies are being published separately to
this Annual Report.

PAGE 26

CONTACTS, QUERIES & COMPLAINTS

Electronic Direct Marketing Complaints
The DPC actively investigates and prosecutes offences
relating to electronic direct marketing under Statutory
Instrument 336/2011 – European Communities (Electronic
Communications Networks and Services) (Privacy and
Electronic Communications) Regulations 2011 (“the ePrivacy
Regulations”). The ePrivacy Regulations transposes Directive
2002/58/EC (“the ePrivacy Directive”) into Irish law.
In 2024, the DPC received 198 new complaints in relation
to electronic direct marketing. Seventy per cent (70%) of
complaints related to unsolicited email communications,
twenty four per cent (24%) to unsolicited SMS text
messages, and six (6%) involved more than one form
of electronic direct marketing method, for example the
complaint related to both unsolicited SMS text messages
and emails from the same organisation.

146 electronic direct marketing investigations
were concluded in 2024. This figure comprises:
•
1 complaint from 2022,
•
35 complaints from 2023; and
•
110 complaints from 2024.

Electronic Direct
Marketing Investigations
2024
110

Concluded in 2024

Electronic Direct
Marketing Complaints

198
received

2023
35
2022
1

Unsolicited
emails
70%
Unsolicited
SMS
24%

More than
one method
6%

146

CONTACTS, QUERIES & COMPLAINTS

PAGE 27

In 2024, the DPC issued 49 warning letters to companies
on foot of unsolicited marketing communications, and
prosecuted eight companies for the sending of unsolicited
marketing communications to individuals without consent.

49

warning letters on
foot of unsolicited
marketing
communications

8

companies prosecuted
for sending unsolicited
marketing
communications

In October 2024, Commissioner Des Hogan delivered the key-note address at
the Law Society’s annual In-house and Public Sector Conference on the theme
“From Law to Leadership”.

In all prosecution cases, the Court directed the companies
to make charitable contributions in lieu of a conviction
and fine. These charitable donations amounted to €9,725
across all eight cases. In all cases, the companies were
instructed to discharge the DPC’s legal costs.
These cases, published on the DPC website, highlight the
DPC’s ongoing commitment to enforcing the ePrivacy
Regulations and holding data controllers accountable for the
processing of personal data in marketing practices. Those
engaged in electronic marketing activities should take note
of the consequences, which may arise if they breach the
regulations. It is critical that before embarking on electronic
marketing campaigns, companies carry out robust testing
and checks with their service providers to ensure that they
have the valid and up-to-date consent of the individuals on
their marketing lists and that their opt-out mechanisms are
fully functional.
All of the companies prosecuted by the DPC in 2024
had each received a prior warning to correct inadequate
processes and procedures for electronic marketing. The
companies and sectors involved included an advertising
agent, a telecommunications network, and companies within
the hospitality and travel sector, as well as the cosmetics
and fitness industry.
Case studies detailing these prosecutions are being
published separately to this Annual Report.

In November 2024, DPC Commissioners Des Hogan and Dale Sunderland
participated in a fireside chat at IAPP’s Europe Data Protection Congress in
Brussels on the topic of “Changes at Ireland’s DPC: An Introduction to the New
Commissioners”, moderated by Kate Colleary of Pembroke Privacy.

PAGE 28

CONTACTS, QUERIES & COMPLAINTS

One-Stop-Shop Complaints
The One-Stop-Shop mechanism (OSS) was established
under the GDPR with the objective of streamlining how
organisations conducting business in more than one EU
member state engage with data protection authorities
(called “supervisory authorities” under the GDPR).The OSS
allows these organisations to be subject to direct oversight
by a single lead supervisory authority (LSA), where they have
a “main or single establishment”, rather than being subject
to separate regulation by the data protection authorities of
each member state. The main or single establishment of an
organisation is generally its place of central administration
and/or decision making in the EU/EEA. Under the OSS
mechanism, the Data Protection Authority which received
the complaint acts as a concerned supervisory authority
(CSA). The CSA is the intermediary between the LSA and the
individual. An individual in an EU/EEA state may thus lodge a
complaint directly with the supervisory authority that is the
LSA or they may lodge it with their local/ national authority,
which will transmit it to the LSA. In this way the DPC acts as
a regulator for EU citizens.

Since the implementation of the GDPR, the DPC has
received a total of 1,853 cross-border complaints,
for which the DPC has been established as the Lead
Supervisory Authority for 1,612 (eighty seven per cent
(87%)) of which 1,327 (Eighty two per cent (82%)) of the
valid cross-border complaints, for which the DPC is the LSA,
have now been concluded. Since May 2018, sixty three
per cent (63%) of cross-border complaints, where the DPC
is LSA, were lodged by complainants with another EU/EEA
supervisory authority and then transferred to the DPC via
the OSS mechanism. Thirty seven per cent (37%) of crossborder complaints were lodged with the DPC directly.
In 2024, the DPC concluded 145 cross-border complaints
and submitted 115 notifications (through the GDPR Article
60 cooperation mechanism of cases where an amicable
resolution had been achieved. Details of these cases can
be found published on the EDPB website.

Since the implementation of the GDPR the DPC:

Received

1,853
cross-border
complaints

Lead Supervisory
Authority for

82%

1,612 (87%)

of these cases
have been
concluded

In 2024, the DPC concluded

and submitted

cross-border complaints

amicable resolution
notifications

145

115

CONTACTS, QUERIES & COMPLAINTS

PAGE 29

Law Enforcement Directive Complaints

Direct Intervention

The Law Enforcement Directive (“LED”), as transposed into
Irish law in the 2018 Act, applies where the processing of
personal data is carried out for the purposes of the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of
criminal offences, or the execution of criminal penalties.
In order for an organisation to engage with these sections,
the organisation must be a “competent authority” as set
out in Section 69 of the 2018 Act.

The DPC’s Direct Intervention Unit handles cases, which
are particularly sensitive and, where immediate intervention
is key to safeguarding the data protection rights of a large
number of people. This tends to arise in circumstances
where a serious data protection matter has been brought
to the attention of the DPC, but there is no valid complaint
(as defined under Section 107 of the 2018 Act) to progress
as the individual who brought the matter to the attention of
the DPC is not directly affected by the issue being raised.

The main two entities which are “competent authorities”
that the DPC engages with via complaints are An Garda
Síochána (“AGS”) and the Irish Prison Service. Statutory
Bodies such as the Office of the Revenue Commissioners,
County Councils and the Department of Social Protection
also fall to be considered competent authorities in relation
to a limited number of their functions.

Some of the matters prioritised by the Direct Intervention
Unit in 2024 included:
•

•
Since May 2018, eighty four per cent (84%) of complaints
examined by the DPC under LED have been related to
Subject Access Requests. The second most common
complaint type examined under LED, at seven per cent
(7%), are those requesting rectification or erasure.  The
majority of requests are directed towards AGS in its role
as the most prominent law-enforcing agency in the state.
In 2024, the DPC received 33 LED complaints and
concluded 19 LED complaints (including complaints
received prior to 2024 but not concluded within those
calendar years).
Further information on LED is available at the DPC website:
Law Enforcement Directive Data Protection Commission QR 4
QR 4

•

Processing of health data by organisations for
purposes other than that for which it was originally
processed;
Processing of health data by nursing homes and lack of
appropriate safeguards for vulnerable residents; and
Organisations requesting excessive data for the
provision of services to adults in vulnerable situations.

The DPC’s Direct Intervention Unit also contributed to
the creation of targeted DPC guidance reflecting matters
which come to the DPC’s attention. One such example of
this is the updated “CCTV Guidance for Data Controllers”
which now includes an in-depth section on the use of
CCTVs in restrooms and areas where there is an increased
expectation of privacy. This guidance has assisted
controllers in complying with their GDPR obligations and
has led to a reduction in concerns being raised with the
DPC regarding the use of CCTV in such areas.
In line with its Regulatory Strategy 2022-2027, the DPC
continues to uphold the rights of those vulnerable groups
who may require additional assistance in ensuring their
rights are protected.
CCTV Guidance Data Controllers QR 5
QR 5

PAGE 30

Complaints under the Data Protection
Acts 1988 & 2003

CONTACTS, QUERIES & COMPLAINTS

•

Lawful basis
Where CCTV is being operated outside the
household exemption the act of data processing,
which is the recording of individuals walking past the
operator’s residence or otherwise capturing personal
data, requires a lawful basis. Insofar as the lawful
bases for the processing of personal data are found
under Article 6 of the GDPR, it is for CCTV operators
to identify and demonstrate their lawful basis for
processing prior to conducting any recording
outside of the household exemption.

•

Compliance with other obligations
The operation of CCTV systems outside of the
household exemption is subject to a number of other
obligations, such as the requirement to have signage
in place stating that CCTV is in operation, and which
include the contact details of the CCTV operator to
ensure that GDPR rights requests can be made by
individuals. CCTV operators are also required to comply
with and respond to access and erasure requests,
amongst other rights provided for by the GDPR, as well
as to have a retention schedule in place with regards
to the personal data which they are processing.

The DPC received two valid complaints that fell to be
considered under the Data Protection Acts 1988 & 2003 in
2024. The DPC issued 12 decisions in 2024 consisting of:
•
•
•

6 complaints being partially upheld;
3 complaints being upheld; and
3 complaints being rejected

Domestic CCTV Complaints

The DPC continues to receive significant volumes of
complaints related to the operation of domestic video
surveillance systems. In 2024, the DPC received 157 such
complaints. The DPC has published guidance focused on
the use of such systems: Domestic CCTV. QR 6
It is important to note some key data protection principles,
which relate to the operation of such systems and the
extent to which data protection laws apply:
•

The household exemption
Data protection law does not apply to the processing
of personal data where the personal data is kept
by an individual and is concerned solely with the
management of his/her personal, family or household
affairs or kept by an individual for recreational
purposes (Article 2(2)(c) of the GDPR). This applies as
long as the personal data is not used in connection
with a professional or commercial activity or made
publicly available. With regards to domestic video
surveillance systems, European case law has
established that the act of continuously recording
footage outside the confines of one’s own property
falls outside the household exemption, and that the
GDPR therefore applies in full.

It is the advice of the DPC that anyone operating a CCTV
camera in their home should ensure that the operation of
the camera falls within the household exemption. By doing
so they would not then be subject to the usual obligations
that data controller would be obliged to consider as
required by the GDPR.
QR 6

3
Breaches

PAGE 31

PAGE 32

BREACHES

Breaches
Organisations are obliged to notify data breaches to the DPC. Such
notifications usually come through an organisation’s Data Protection
Officer (DPO). The DPO can distinguish minor from major breaches.
The DPC works closely with DPOs to mitigate data breaches where they
occur. Early responses can be invaluable in addressing financial, legal
and reputational risks to organisations as well as in vindicating the
rights of the data subjects concerned.
In 2024, the DPC received 7,781 valid data breaches.
This represented an eleven per cent 11% increase (794)
on the overall data breach numbers received by the DPC
in 2023.  Of the notifications received, 7,346 were GDPR
notifications and, of those:
•
•
•

3,958 related to the private sector;
3,137 to the public sector; and
251 came from the voluntary and charity sector.

Valid Data
Breaches 2024
7,781

+11% from 2023

Voluntary &
charity sector
251

Fifty per cent (50%) of notified cases arose as a result of
correspondence being sent to the wrong recipient.
Since the introduction of the GDPR – and in line with
previous years – the highest category of data breaches
notified to the DPC in 2024 related to unauthorised
disclosures in incidents affecting single individuals or small
groups, accounting for sixty per cent (60%) of
total notifications.

Public sector
3,137

Of the breach notifications received in 2024, eighty one
per cent (81%) were concluded by year-end.
In keeping with the trend of previous years, public sector
bodies and banks accounted for the “top ten” organisations
with the highest number of breach notifications recorded
against them. Insurance and telecom companies featured
prominently in the top twenty. Notably, correspondence
issuing to incorrect recipients because of poor operational
practices and human error – for example inserting a wrong
document into an envelope addressed to an unrelated third
party – continued to feature prominently. The DPC engages
with organisations via its supervisory function to make
organisations aware of their obligations and offer guidance.
The DPC continually monitors breach notifications received
to identify trends and inform further investigative and
enforcement actions.

Private sector
3,958

50%
81%

breaches
result of
correspondence
sent to wrong
recipient

breach
notifications
received
concluded

BREACHES

PAGE 33

Breach Notifications: Nature of Breach for cases
received 2024

Nature of Breach
Unauthorised disclosure - postal

Total as %
32%

material to incorrect recipient
Unauthorised disclosure - email

14%

incorrect recipient
Accidental/unauthorised alteration

Only one per cent (1%) of the breaches reported involved
more than 100 individuals.

Ninety two per cent (92%) of the 428 breaches were
concluded by year end.

10%

of personal data
Loss or destruction of personal

The majority of breaches reported were in relation to a
single individual and involved personal data being disclosed
in an unauthorised manner, or correspondence being
inadvertently misdirected to the wrong recipients.

EPrivacy Breaches 2024
8%

+193% from 2023

data - accidental
Hacking

5%

92%
concluded

EPrivacy Breaches:
The DPC received 428 e-privacy data breach notifications
(an increase of over one hundred and ninety three per
cent (193%) on the 146 figure for 2023) under the ePrivacy
Regulations, accounting for just over six per cent (6%) of
total breach cases notified in 2024.
This increase in notifications follows on from a similar
trend in 2023, in which the DPC saw a rise in ePrivacy
breach notifications as a result of the entry into force of the
Electronic Communications Code Regulations in September
2022 and the expanded definition of the term “electronic
communications service”.
The most frequent cause of ePrivacy breaches reported to
the DPC arose as a result of:
•

•

•

Incorrect recording of details due to human error,
which resulted in a breach (e.g. email addresses/phone
numbers recorded incorrectly);
Communications directed to the wrong recipients
(postal addresses/Eircodes recorded incorrectly or
postal details not updated by individuals);
Social engineering/ phishing schemes (third parties
gaining access to customer accounts, including access
to personal details).

2024
428

Law Enforcement Directive Breaches
The DPC also received 79 valid breach notifications in
relation to the LED, (Law Enforcement Directive (EU)
2016/680), which was transposed into Irish law by
the 2018 Act.
Data Breach Complaints
Data breach complaints arise where an individual
makes a complaint to the DPC, having become aware
of a breach of their personal data. In 2024, the DPC
handled 20 complaints relating to alleged personal
data breaches which were not resolved through an
amicable resolution process.
Breach case studies are being published separately to
this Annual Report.

4

PAGE 34

Decisions and
Inquiries

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

PAGE 35

Decisions and Inquiries
Statutory Inquiries by the DPC
Under section 110 of the 2018 Act, the DPC may conduct two different
types of statutory inquiry in order to establish whether an infringement
of the GDPR or the 2018 Act has occurred:
• A complaint-based inquiry; and
• An inquiry of the DPC’s “own volition”.
As of 31 December 2024, the DPC had 89 Statutory Inquiries on-hand,
including 53 Cross-border Inquiries.
Decisions that were taken in 2024
Organisations

Decision Issued

Fine Imposed

Corrective Measure Imposed

Airbnb Ireland UC

31 January 2024

N/A

Reprimand re Articles 5(1)(c) and 6 of the
GDPR.

Apple Distribution
International Limited

29 February 2024

N/A

No infringements found.

Groupon Ireland
Operations Limited

8 March 2024

N/A

Reprimand re Articles 5(1)(c), 6(1), 12(2), 15(1),
15(3) and 17(1) of the GDPR.

Apple Distribution
International Limited

8 March 2024

N/A

Order to bring processing into compliance
and Reprimand re Articles 13(1)(c) and 13(1)(d)
of the GDPR.

Mediahuis Ireland Group
Ltd (formerly Irish News
and Media plc)

7 June 2024

N/A

No infringements found.

Meta Platforms Ireland
Limited

26 September
2024

€91 million

Reprimand re Articles 5(1)(f), 32(1), 33(1), and
33(5) of the GDPR.

LinkedIn Ireland
Unlimited Company

22 October 2024

€310 million

Order to bring processing into compliance
and Reprimand re Articles 5(1)(a), 6(1), 13(1)(c)
and 14(1)(c) of the GDPR.

PAGE 36

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Organisations

Decision Issued

Fine Imposed

Corrective Measure Imposed

Sligo County Council

13 November 2024

€29,500

Temporary ban on CCTV at a number
of locations.
Order to bring processing into compliance
and Reprimand re: Articles 5(1)(a), 5(1)(c),
5(1)(e), 5(1)(f) 13, 24, 25, 30, and 32(1) of the
GDPR. Sections 71(1)(a), 71(1)(c), 71(1)(e), 71(1)
(f), 71(10), 72, 72(1), 72(2), 75, 75(1), 75(3)
76(2), 78, 79, 81, 82(2), 84 and 90(1) of the
Data Protection Act 2018.

Maynooth University		

22 November 2024

€40,000

Reprimand re: Articles 5(1)(f), 32(1) and
33(1) GDPR.
Order to bring processing into compliance
with Article 32(1).

Meta Platforms Ireland
Limited (Token Breaches
– Art. 33)

12 December 2024

€11 million

Reprimand re: Article 33 of the GDPR.

Meta Platforms Ireland
Limited (Token Breaches
– Art. 25)

12 December 2024

€240 million

Reprimand re: Article 25 of the GDPR.

Confirmation of Administrative Fines
When the DPC imposes a fine on a controller, that fine must
be confirmed before the Courts. In 2024, the DPC imposed
over €652 million in administrative fines. This included
fines imposed on LinkedIn, Meta Platforms Ireland Limited,
Sligo County Council and Maynooth University. All fines
imposed by the DPC must be confirmed in Court before
they are collected. Once collected, fines are remitted to the
central exchequer in Ireland. In 2024, the DPC collected and
remitted a total of €582,500 in administrative fines to the
central exchequer in Ireland. This included an administrative
fine of €22,500 on the Department of Health, which was
confirmed in the Dublin Circuit Court in 2024.

€652 million in
administrative fines

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Domestic Decisions that concluded in 2024
Mediahuis Ireland Group Ltd
(formerly Irish News and Media plc)
The DPC issued the Final Decision in this inquiry in June 2024. This was a
complaint-based inquiry in which the DPC evaluated the balance between the
complainant’s personal data rights and the rights of a media organisation to
freedom of expression. The DPC concluded, after consideration of the facts and
the submissions of the complainant and the data controller, that the exemption
for freedom of expression provided for in section 43(1) of the 2018 Act applied.
The DPC found no infringement and dismissed the complaint.
Details of this decision can be found on page 38 of this report.

Sligo County Council
The DPC issued the Final Decision in this inquiry in November 2024. The Decision
followed a data protection audit into the processing of personal data, by or
on behalf of the Council, through the use of CCTV, automated number plate
recognition systems and any other technologies that may be used to monitor
individuals. The Decision found the Council infringed Articles 5(1)(a), 5(1)(c), 5(1)
(e), 5(1)(f), 13, 24, 25, 30 and 32(1) of the GDPR along with sections 71(1)(a), 71(1)
(c), 71(1)(e), 71(1)(f), 71(10), 72, 72(1), 72(2), 75, 75(1), 75(3) 76(2), 78, 79, 81, 82(2),
84 and 90(1) of the 2018 Act 2018. The corrective measures exercised by the DPC
included a temporary ban on processing personal data, including through CCTV
cameras and an administrative fine in the amount of €29,500.
Details of this decision can be found on page 39 of this report.

Maynooth University
The DPC issued the Final Decision in this inquiry in November 2024. The inquiry
related a personal data breach notified by Maynooth University in November 2018.
The breach affected the email accounts of a number of university employees. The
DPC assessed Maynooth University’s technical and organisational measures for
ensuring the security of personal data that it processed, and examined compliance
with the controller’s obligation to notify breaches promptly. The DPC found that
Maynooth University had infringed Articles 5(1)(f), 32 and 33 of the GDPR. The DPC
reprimanded Maynooth University, imposed administrative fines totalling €40,000
and ordered Maynooth University to bring its processing into compliance with the
security requirements of the GDPR.
Details of this decision can be found on page 40 of this report.

PAGE 37

PAGE 38

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Summary of DPC Decision Concerning
Mediahuis Ireland Group Limited
In March 2021 the DPC received a complaint against
Medihuis Ireland Group Limited (“MIG”), the publisher of
newspapers including the Sunday Independent, the Irish
Independent and the Herald. The complainant alleged
that MIG had breached her data protection rights by its
processing of the complainant’s personal data and special
category personal data (specifically, data concerning her
health). The complainant listed articles and videos published
by MIG that discussed the complainant and her personal
injury court action that she had commenced against a hotel.
The complaint highlighted that these contained information
that could have come only from court documents that
were not publicly available and that had not yet been
made public in a hearing in court. The complaint alleged
breaches of provisions of the GDPR including the data
protection principles (Article 5) and a lack of a lawful basis
for processing (Article 6). The complainant also claimed that
MIG had breached her rights to transparency by failing to
give her information concerning its processing of her data
when required (Article 14).
In response, MIG asserted that its right to freedom of
expression and information for journalistic purposes, which
is expressly protected by Article 85 of the GDPR and section
43 of the 2018 Act, provided a full answer to the complaint.
MIG noted that section 43 of the 2018 Act exempts
processing from certain provisions of the GDPR where it is
undertaken in exercise of the right of freedom of expression
and information. Based on this, it took the position that
the DPC did not have power to inquire into the details and
extent of MIG’s coverage of the complainant’s personal
injuries case or related matters. The DPC did not accept
that argument.
The DPC noted that the right to freedom of expression and
information is not an absolute right, and the exemption
under section 43 of the 2018 Act applies only to the extent
that complying with the relevant provisions of the GDPR
would be incompatible with exercising that right for (in
this case) journalistic purposes. To determine whether
the processing was covered by the exemption, the DPC
had to assess its purpose and whether complying with the

relevant GDPR provisions would be incompatible with MIG
exercising its freedom of expression right. The inquiry was
an appropriate means of doing this. The DPC also made
clear that the inquiry would not seek to uncover
journalists’ sources.
There was no dispute that MIG’s exercise of its right to
freedom of expression was for journalistic purposes, so
the central issue was the compatibility of that exercise
with the rights protected by the relevant provisions of
the GDPR. Consistent with the approach taken by the
European Court of Human Rights, the Court of Justice
of the European Union and the Irish Courts, the DPC
conducted a balancing exercise to assess MIG’s right
to freedom of expression against the competing data
protection rights of the complainant.
The DPC considered submissions of the complainant and
MIG, and its own examination of Irish, EU and European
Court of Human Rights case law. The DPC concluded that
to uphold the GDPR rights asserted by the complainant
would restrict journalism in a way that would be detrimental
to MIG’s ability to report on matters of public interest,
and to the public’s right to be informed. The DPC took
account of the broad nature of “the public interest” in
relation to journalism, and to the complainant’s public
profile as an elected representative in a political party with
a stated position on insurance costs and personal injury
claims. While the information may have been sourced
from documents intended to be used in court, this did not
necessarily prevent reporting on them. The DPC found that
section 43 applied to MIG’s processing of the complainant’s
personal data, and that the complaint should therefore
be dismissed under section 112(1)(b) of the 2018 Act.
The Decision can be found on the DPC website at
Inquiry concerning Mediahuis Ireland Group Limited (MIG)
June 2024 QR 1
QR 1

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

PAGE 39

Summary of DPC Decision Concerning
Sligo County Council
On 13 November 2024, the DPC issued a Final Decision
following an inquiry into certain processing of personal data
by Sligo County Council. This inquiry was one of a number of
own-volition inquiries into a broad range of issues pertaining
to surveillance technologies deployed by State authorities.
This inquiry sought to assess whether Sligo County Council
was processing personal data in compliance with the GDPR
and the Data Protection Act 2018. The inquiry examined a
number of the Council’s processing operations including its
use of CCTV cameras in public places used for the purposes
of prosecuting crime or other purposes. The findings made
in the decision include:
•
Findings that Sligo County Council lacked a valid legal
basis for processing of personal data from CCTV and
Automated Number Plate Recognition (ANPR) cameras.
•
Findings that Sligo County Council failed to erect
appropriately worded and located signage in respect
of the processing of personal data collected via
CCTV cameras.
The other findings in the decision include infringements
relating to Sligo County Council’s obligations to carry out
data protection impact assessments, to maintain data logs
for specific accesses to CCTV recordings, and to implement
appropriate technical and organisational measures.

The corrective measures exercised by the DPC were
as follows:
•
A temporary ban on the processing of personal data
through CCTV cameras and ANPR cameras at a number
of locations until a valid legal basis can be identified.
•
An order to Sligo County Council to bring its processing
of personal data into compliance taking certain actions
specified in the decision.
•
A reprimand in respect of Sligo County Council’s
infringement of section 79 of the Data Protection
Act 2018
•
An administrative fine of €29,500
The Decision can be found on the DPC website at
Inquiry into Sligo County Council - November 2024 QR 2

QR 2

PAGE 40

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Summary of DPC Decision Concerning
Maynooth University
On 22 November 2024, the DPC made a Final Decision
following an inquiry into a personal data breach in
Maynooth University. The inquiry related a personal data
breach notified by Maynooth University in November
2018. The breach affected the email accounts of university
employees, and allowed unauthorised persons to gain
control of up to six accounts. The unauthorised persons
used control of one account to assist in perpetrating a
fraud, leading to a financial loss by one of the persons
affected. The subsequent investigation and actions by the
University allowed that person to be reimbursed. The DPC
assessed Maynooth University’s technical and organisational
measures for ensuring the security of personal data that
it processed, and also examined compliance with the
controller’s obligation to notify breaches promptly.
The DPC’s Decision found that Maynooth University:
•
Infringed Articles 5(1)(f) and 32 of the GDPR by failing
to ensure appropriate security personal data that it
processed, and to implement appropriate technical
and organisational measures to ensure such security;
and
•
Infringed Article 33(1) of the GDPR by failing to notify
the DPC of the data breach within 72 hours.

The DPC reprimanded Maynooth University, imposed
administrative fines totalling €40,000 and ordered
Maynooth University to bring its processing into compliance
with the security requirements of the GDPR.
Maynooth University was ordered to complete:
a. The implementation of multifactor authentication for
all user accounts.
b. A review of anti-spam configuration and policies,
including regular review and updates as the risk
landscape changes.
c. Regular security updates of software.
d. A robust password management policy including
processes, methods and techniques for secure
storing of user passwords.
e. Mandatory data protection and cyber security training
for all staff, appropriate to their role and level of risk,
and updated as the risk landscape changes.
f. Development of policies to respond to data breaches
and data security incidents in ways that are appropriate
to the risks posed and that ensure compliance with
Maynooth University’s obligations as a data controller
under the GDPR.
The Decision can be found on the DPC website at
Inquiry into Maynooth University - November 2024 QR 3
QR 3

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Domestic cases that reached a key
investigative stage in 2024

City of Dublin Education and Training Board (SUSI)
This own-volition inquiry commenced in 2019 after CDETB notified a personal data
breach in which the personal data associated with website applications for student
grants were made available to unauthorised persons.
CDETB operates a website (https://www.susi.ie) on which third-level students can
find information relating to their eligibility for a higher education grant. Student
Universal Support Ireland (SUSI) was created in 2012 as a business unit of CDETB
(then known as the City of Dublin Vocational Education Committee) following
CDETB’s designation as the single awarding authority for new grants under the
Student Support Act 2011. In November 2018, CDETB discovered that its web
server was retaining personal data in the form of contact forms and uploaded
documents. Prior to that discovery, the data controller had assumed that personal
data being submitted through its website were being emailed to the relevant SUSI
team and were not being retained locally on its web server. CDETB also detected
malicious malware contained on its web server in October 2018.
The DPC commenced a statutory inquiry in July 2019. The DPC wrote to CDETB in
March 2024, notifying CDETB of the commencement of the decision-making stage
of the inquiry and provided CDETB with the Final Inquiry Report from the evidence
gathering stage of the inquiry. The matter was ongoing at year’s end.

Department of Social Protection re SAFE/PSC Facial Matching
This own-volition inquiry considers whether certain processing of personal data by
the Department of Social Protection, in the context of registering to obtain a Public
Services Card, is compliant with the GDPR and with the Data Protection Act 2018.
The DPC issued its Draft Decision in November 2023 and received submissions on it
from the Department in February 2024. The matter was ongoing at year’s end.

PAGE 41

PAGE 42

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Permanent TSB
The DPC commenced this inquiry following three separate breach notifications from
Permanent TSB (PTSB) in May 2022. All three personal data breach notifications
concern circumstances where a malicious actor attempted to gain access to a
data subject’s bank account by calling PTSB’s Open 24 call centre. The inquiry is
examining the organisational and technical measures implemented to ensure the
security of personal data and whether PTSB complied with its obligations to notify
the DPC of data breaches without undue delay. The DPC provided a statement of
issues to PTSB in January 2024 and received submissions from PTSB in February
2024. The matter was ongoing at year’s end.

Health Service Executive
In 2023, the Health Service Executive (HSE) notified the DPC of two occasions
of personal data breaches concerning unauthorised access to physical medical
records at two separate HSE facilities. In both instances, unauthorised third
parties accessed storage facilities operated by the HSE, and published video
footage on social media platforms of physical files stored at these facilities. In May
2024, the DPC commenced an own-volition inquiry into this matter. The inquiry is
addressing the HSE’s compliance with GDPR obligations concerning data protection
governance, security of processing, communication of data breaches to data
subjects, and the GDPR principles of storage limitation, integrity and confidentiality,
and accountability.

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Cross-border Cases
Where a particular inquiry or complaint concerns the examination of cross-border
processing, the GDPR requires the DPC, where it acts as the Lead Supervisory
Authority (LSA), to conclude its decision in accordance with the cooperation
mechanism set out in Article 60 of the GDPR. The Article 60 mechanism outlines
a procedure designed to facilitate the conclusion of decisions on the basis of
consensus between the LSA and other European Data Protection Authorities,
known as Concerned Supervisory Authorities (CSAs). In accordance with the GDPR
and its duty of sincere cooperation, the DPC cooperates with its peer EU/ EEA
regulators throughout the Inquiry process. Through the Article 60 mechanism, CSAs
are enabled to share their views on the inquiry or complaint (as the case may be)
with the LSA, which must take due account of their views. Where those views take
the form of a relevant and reasoned objection, the LSA must take account of those
objections by amending its draft decision, failing which it must refer the objections
to the European Data Protection Board for determination pursuant to the Dispute
Resolution process set out in Article 65 of the GDPR.

Large-Scale Cross-border Cases that
concluded in 2024
Meta Platforms Ireland Limited (Meta):
passwords stored in “plaintext”
The DPC adopted its Final Decision in this inquiry in September 2024. This
inquiry examined whether Meta complied with its GDPR obligations in relation
to personal data breaches and secure processing of user passwords. The inquiry
was commenced in response to a breach of security identified by Meta in 2019,
where user passwords were inadvertently stored in “plaintext” on Facebook’s
internal systems (i.e. without cryptographic protection or encryption). The Decision
found that Meta had infringed Articles 33(1) and 33(5) of the GDPR by failing to
notify the DPC of a personal data breach and by failing to document the personal
data breaches involving the storage of user passwords in plaintext. The Decision
also found that Meta infringed Articles 5(1)(f) and 32(1) of the GDPR by failing to
implement appropriate measures to ensure the appropriate security of
users’ passwords.
The Decision included a reprimand and administrative fines totalling
€91 million.
Details of this decision can be found on page 46 of this report.

PAGE 43

PAGE 44

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

LinkedIn Ireland Unlimited Company
The DPC adopted its Final Decision in this inquiry in October 2024. The inquiry
assessed the lawfulness, fairness and transparency of LinkedIn’s processing of the
personal data of its EU/EEA members for the purposes of behavioural analysis and
targeted advertising. The inquiry was commenced in August 2018 following the
receipt of a complaint made by the French NGO, La Quadrature Du Net, on behalf
of affected data subjects under the procedure provided for in Article 80(1) of the
GDPR. The Final Decision found that LinkedIn infringed Articles 5(1)(a), 6(1), 13(1)(c)
and 14(1)(c).
As a result of those infringements, the Final Decision included a reprimand,
an order to bring processing into compliance and administrative fines
totalling €310 million.
Details of this decision can be found on page 47 of this report.

Meta Platforms Ireland Limited (Meta):
Token Breach Article 33
This was one of two own-volition inquiries opened by the DPC in relation to a
personal data breach reported by Meta Platforms Ireland Limited (then known as
Facebook Ireland Ltd) in September 2018. The breach arose from the operation
of user tokens on the Facebook platform, which had been exploited to allow
unauthorised access to user accounts. Approximately 29 million Facebook
users globally were affected by this breach, of whom approximately 2.8
million were based in the EU/EEA. This inquiry focused on compliance with the
controller’s obligation to notify personal data breaches to its supervisory authority
and to provide relevant information in accordance with Article 33 of the GDPR. In its
Decision, the DPC concluded that Meta had infringed Article 33(3)(a) and (c) of the
GDPR, as well as Article 33(5) of the GDPR.
The DPC issued its Decision in December 2024, reprimanding Meta and
ordering it to pay administrative fines totalling €11 million.
Details of this decision can be found on page 48 of this report.

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

PAGE 45

Meta Platforms Ireland Limited (Meta):
Token Breach Data Protection by Design and Default
This was a second own-volition inquiry concerning the breach notified by Meta
Platforms Ireland Limited in September 2018 concerning user tokens. The inquiry
was commenced by the DPC in October 2018 and focused on the controller’s
obligation under Article 25 of the GDPR to ensure data protection by design and
default. In its Decision issued on 12 December 2024, the DPC concluded that Meta
had failed to implement appropriate technical and organisational measures and
safeguards to ensure data protection and to protect data subject’s rights, as required
by Article 25(1) of the GDPR. The DPC also found that Meta had infringed Article 25(2)
of the GDPR by not ensuring that, by default, only the minimum personal data are
processed or made available to other persons without intervention by the
data subject.
The DPC issued its Decision in 12 December 2024, reprimanded Meta and imposed
administrative fines totalling €240 million.
Details of this decision can be found on page 49 of this report.

DPC Commissioners Des Hogan and Dale Sunderland along with Deputy Commissioners Graham Doyle and Gráinne Hawkes met with European Data
Protection Supervisor (EDPS) Wojtek Wiewiorowski and Team.

PAGE 46

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Summary of DPC Decision concerning Meta Platforms
Ireland Limited (Meta): own volition inquiry concerning
the storage of passwords in “plaintext”
On 21 March 2019, Meta Platforms Ireland Limited informed
the DPC that it had inadvertently stored passwords of
social media users in “plaintext” on its internal systems (i.e.
without cryptographic protection or encryption). On being
made aware of these incidents in January 2019, Meta had
formed the view that the inadvertent logging of plaintext
passwords did not constitute a personal data breach
within the meaning of the GDPR. On 24 April 2019, the DPC
commenced an own-volition inquiry in response to
this issue.
In a Final Decision adopted in September 2024, the DPC
made findings of infringement of the GDPR against Meta
concerning its obligations in relation to personal data
breaches, and concerning Meta’s obligations to implement
measures to ensure secure processing of user passwords.
The DPC was satisfied that the storage of passwords in
“plaintext” in Meta’s internal systems constituted a personal
data breach within the meaning of the GDPR. On this basis,
the DPC found that Meta had infringed Article 33(1) of the
GDPR by failing to notify the DPC without delay of a specific
personal data breach (concerning tens of millions of
passwords of EU users) which was discovered by Meta on
31 January 2019.
The DPC also found that Meta had infringed Article 33(5)
of the GDPR, by failing to document two personal data
breaches as discovered on 7 January 2019 and 31
January 2019.

Finally, the Decision found that Meta had infringed Articles
5(1)(f) and 32(1) of the GDPR by failing to implement
appropriate measures to ensure a level of security
appropriate to the risk, including the ability to ensure the
ongoing confidentiality of user passwords.
The DPC submitted a draft decision to the other Concerned
Supervisory Authorities across the EU/EEA in June 2024, in
accordance with Article 60 of the GDPR. No relevant and
reasoned objections to the draft decision were raised
by the other authorities and all EU/EEA regulators were
therefore deemed to be in agreement with the decision of
the DPC.
The Final Decision reprimanded Meta for the infringements
of the GDPR, and imposed administrative fines totalling
€91 million. This decision has been appealed by Meta.
The Decision can be found on the DPC website at
Inquiry into Meta Platforms Ireland Limited September 2024 QR4

QR 4

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

PAGE 47

Summary of DPC Decision concerning LinkedIn
Ireland Unlimited Company: lawfulness, fairness
and transparency of the processing of user data for
behavioural analysis and targeted advertising
In October 2024, the DPC adopted its Final Decision finding
that LinkedIn infringed Articles 5(1)(a), 6(1), 13(1)(c) and 14(1)
(c) of the GDPR. The Decision concerned the lawfulness,
fairness and transparency of the processing of the data
of members of the LinkedIn platform for the purposes of
behavioural analysis and targeted advertising. The processing
of personal data for these purposes encompassed personal
data provided directly to LinkedIn by its members (firstparty data) and personal data relating to its members
obtained by LinkedIn via third party partners (third-party
data). The processing additionally included the development
of aggregated analytics reports by LinkedIn, based on
data received from third party partners via a tracking pixel
combined with first party data. These analytics reports were
provided by LinkedIn to third party partners to enable them
to more effectively target LinkedIn members.
The Decision followed a complaint-based inquiry, which
was commenced on 20 August 2018, following a complaint
made by the French non-profit organisation, La Quadrature
Du Net. The complaint was initially made to the French Data
Protection Authority , and thereafter provided to the DPC,
in its role as the lead supervisory authority for LinkedIn.
The DPC submitted a draft decision to the other Concerned
Supervisory Authorities across the EU/EEA in July 2024. No
relevant and reasoned objections to the draft decision
of the DPC were received and all EU/EEA regulators were
therefore deemed to be in agreement with the decision of
the DPC.
The Final Decision recorded a number of findings of
infringement of the GDPR. First, the DPC concluded that
LinkedIn did not validly rely on Article 6(1)(a) of the GDPR
(consent) to process the third party data of its members for
the purpose of behavioural analysis and targeted advertising
on the basis that the consent obtained by LinkedIn was
not freely given, sufficiently informed or specific, or
unambiguous. Second, the DPC determined that LinkedIn
did not validly rely on 6(1)(b) of the GDPR (contractual
necessity) or Article 6(1)(f) of the GDPR (legitimate interests)
to process the first party personal data of its members for
behavioural analysis and targeted advertising., Third, the DPC
determined that LinkedIn did not validly rely on the legitimate
interest legal basis to process third party personal data of its
members for analytics.

4

La Commission Nationale de l’Informatique et des Libertés (“CNIL”).

The DPC additionally concluded that LinkedIn’s processing
of personal data for behavioural analysis and targeted
advertising was not conducted in a fair manner, and that
LinkedIn did not meet its transparency obligations in
respect of the information it provided to data subjects
regarding its reliance on Article 6(1)(a), Article 6(1)(b)
and Article 6(1)(f) of the GDPR as lawful bases. The DPC
concluded that this failure to provide sufficient transparency
information, combined with a number of unfair practices,
was misleading and impacted the autonomy of users to
exercise control over their personal data.
The DPC imposed administrative fines totalling €310
million on LinkedIn in respect of the infringements identified
in the Final Decision. Furthermore, the DPC imposed a
reprimand on LinkedIn and made an order that it bring its
processing into compliance with the GDPR within a period of
months. LinkedIn has appealed this decision.
The Decision can be found on the DPC website at
Inquiry into LinkedIn Ireland Unlimited Company October 2024 QR5

QR 5

PAGE 48

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Summary of DPC Decisions Concerning Token Breach
by Meta Platforms Ireland Limited (Meta)
The DPC opened these  two joined inquiries in October 2018
in response to a personal data breach that Meta Platforms
Ireland Limited (then called Facebook Platforms Ireland
Limited) (Meta) notified to the DPC on 28 September 2018.
The breach arose from the use of user tokens in certain
features of the Facebook platform. User tokens are codes
that can be used to identify a particular user during an
online session, to give them access to data at appropriate
levels of security and to control the features to which the
user has access.
The breach involved tokens generated by a Facebook
feature called “View As”, which allowed a user to see
their own page as other users would see it. Using this
with two other Facebook features – the “Happy Birthday
composer” and Facebook’s video uploader service – allowed
unauthorised persons to obtain user tokens identifying
themselves as other Facebook users. Using those tokens,
the unauthorised persons could access personal data
on or through the Facebook platform as if they were
the users identified by those tokens. Meta’s US parent
company, Facebook, Inc. (now Meta Platforms Inc.) identified
an anomalous increase in activity linked to its video
uploading service and determined that this was caused by
unauthorised persons using the features mentioned above
to generate user tokens. The DPC was notified of this by
email early on the morning of 28 September 2018.
Meta’s investigations determined that the vulnerability
arose from a new video uploading function introduced
in July 2017. Meta engineers patched and resolved the
vulnerability on 28 September 2018.

The first inquiry examined Meta’s compliance with Article
33 of the GDPR, which requires controllers to notify
breaches to their supervisory authority. The DPC found
that Meta had notified the breach promptly and within the
72 hours prescribed by Article 33(1). However, the DPC
determined that Meta had not provided all information
required for compliance with Article 33(3). The notification
was insufficient in relation to identifying the cause of the
breach, its nature and likely consequences, the categories
of data subjects affected and type of personal data records
affected. The DPC submitted a draft decision to the other
Concerned Supervisory Authorities across the EU/EEA
in September 2024, in accordance with Article 60 of the
GDPR. No relevant and reasoned objections to the
draft decision of the DPC were received and all EU/ EEA
regulators were therefore deemed to be in agreement with
the decision of the DPC.
In the Final Decision dated 12 December 2024, the
DPC determined that Meta was not in a position at the
time of notifying to provide certain other information
required under Article 33(3) of the GDPR to be provided
“where possible”, and so found no infringement in that
regard. Finally, the DPC determined that Meta had not
maintained internal documentation of the breach to the
standard required by Article 33(5) of the GDPR. The DPC
issued a reprimand to Meta and ordered it to pay an
administrative fine of €8 million for its infringement
of Article 33(3) of the GDPR and of €3 million for its
infringement of Article 33(5) of the GDPR.

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

PAGE 49

In the second inquiry, the DPC examined Meta’s compliance
with Article 25 of the GDPR, which requires data protection
by design and default. The DPC submitted a draft decision
to the other Concerned Supervisory Authorities across the
EU/EEA in September 2024, in accordance with Article 60
of the GDPR. The other authorities raised no relevant
and reasoned objections to the draft decision and were
therefore deemed to be in agreement with the decision of
the DPC.

the processing are processed, and that controllers must
implement appropriate technical and organisational
measures to ensure this. The DPC found that the Meta
design decisions relating to generation of the user tokens
exploited in this breach allowed those tokens to have an
unduly wide range of access, rather than being restricted
to the limited functions for which they were intended to
be used. The DPC therefore found that Meta had infringed
Article 25(2).

In the Final Decision dated 12 December 2024, the DPC
found that the unauthorised persons’ use of compromised
access tokens had resulted from Meta’s failure to
implement measures to ensure that its processing provided
appropriate security of personal data as required by the
integrity and confidentiality principle set out in Article 5(1)
(f) of the GDPR. As a result, the DPC found that Meta had
infringed Article 25(1) of the GDPR, which requires such
measures in both the design and operation of processing.
Article 25(2) of the GDPR requires that, by default, only
personal data necessary for each specific purpose of

In the second inquiry, the DPC reprimanded Meta
and imposed an administrative fine of €130 million
for the infringement of Article 25(1) of the GDPR, and
€110 million in respect of the infringement of Article
25(2) of the GDPR.
Further information on this Decision can be found on the
DPC website at
Irish Data Protection Commission fines Meta €251 Million December 2024 QR6
QR 6

PAGE 50

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Cases which commenced or where submissions
on a Draft Decision, Preliminary Draft Decision
or a Statement of Issues were invited from the
relevant parties during 2024
MTCH Technology Services Limited
(MTCH) and the Tinder service
This own-volition inquiry concerns MTCH’s compliance with the right of data
subjects to access their data under Article 15 of the GDPR and the right to erasure
under Article 17 of the GDPR. Specifically, the inquiry examines whether MTCH
is in compliance with its obligations concerning data subject access requests,
and whether MTCH’s processing of users’ personal data in the context of data
erasure requests is in compliance with the principles and obligations of the GDPR.
Submissions were received from MTCH in response to the Preliminary Draft
Decision. The matter was ongoing at year’s end.

Meta Platforms Ireland Limited (Meta):
behavioural analysis and targeted advertising
This inquiry concerns a complaint in relation to the lawfulness of the processing
of personal data of users of the Facebook service for behavioural analysis and
targeted advertising. The complaint in question was lodged by a French digital
advocacy organisation, La Quadrature du Net with the French Data Protection
Authority, through Article 80 of the GDPR whereby a data subject can mandate
a not-for-profit body to lodge a complaint and act on his/her behalf. The DPC
completed its final inquiry report in July 2024. It received additional submissions
from the data controller in August 2024. The matter was ongoing at year’s end.

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Google PaLM2 AI inquiry
This is an own-volition inquiry commenced by the DPC in September 2024 relating
to Google’s processing of the personal data of EU/EEA data subjects associated with
the development of its foundational AI model, Pathways Language Model 2 (PaLM2).
The inquiry concerns whether Google complied with any obligations that it had to
undertake a data protection impact assessment, pursuant to Article 35 of the GDPR,
prior to engaging the personal data processing. A notice of commencement issued
to Google in September 2024 containing a range of queries. Submissions were
received from Google in October 2024. The information gathering phase remained
ongoing at year’s end.

Ryanair DAC inquiry
This is an own-volition inquiry commenced by the DPC in October 2024 relating
to Ryanair’s processing of personal data (biometric data) as part of the Customer
Verification Processes for customers who book Ryanair flights from third party
websites or Online Travel Agents.
The inquiry concerns Ryanair’s practice of requesting additional ID verification from
customers who book travel tickets via third party websites, as opposed to booking
directly on Ryanair’s website. The DPC had received a number of complaints from
Ryanair customers across the EU/EEA regarding the verification methods being
offered to customers which includes the use of facial recognition technology using
customers’ biometric data. A notice of commencement issued to Ryanair in October
2024 containing a range of queries. Submissions were received from Ryanair at
the end of October 2024. The information gathering phase remained ongoing at
year’s end.

PAGE 51

PAGE 52

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Cases involving individual complainants concluded by
DPC through EU Co-Operation procedure in 2024
In addition to these large-scale inquiries, the DPC also concludes individual cross-border cases,
including notifications of outcomes achieved in complaints amicably resolved, through the EU
cooperation procedure.
In 2024, the DPC concluded 115 such cases. Details of these cases can be found published on the
EDPB Article 60 case register. In addition, the DPC also concluded four (4) decisions concerning
cross-border complaints in 2024.

Complaint-based cross-border decisions that
concluded in 2024
Airbnb Ireland UC:
Lawful processing of personal data for identity verification
This inquiry, commenced in December 2022, concerns a
complaint in relation to the lawful processing of personal
data for the purpose of identity verification and the principle
of data minimisation.
An individual contended that Airbnb had unlawfully
requested a copy of their identity document in order to
verify their identity to carry out an erasure request after
they had discontinued with the Airbnb registration process.
The individual also alleged that during the course of
registration with the Airbnb platform, Airbnb had sought a
copy of their identity to complete the registration process.
The individual provided Airbnb with their email address and
phone number.
The individual requested Airbnb erase all of their personal
data and ensure that no data was transferred to third
parties, however in response Airbnb sought a copy of the
individual’s ID to verify their identity in order to carry out
the erasure request and then further clarified they were
seeking a copy of a Government issues identity document.
The individual considered that this requirement did not
have any legal basis and that it was an infringement of their
right to erasure of their personal data. Ultimately, Airbnb
authenticated the individual’s identity through account login
and the erasure request was processed.

The scope of the inquiry included whether Airbnb had a
lawful basis for requesting a copy of the complainant’s ID in
order to verify their identity so that they could delete this
account; whether the request for this information infringed
the principle of data minimisation; and whether the principle
of transparency and provision of certain information at the
point the person data were collected were complied with.
No relevant and reasoned objections were received from
concerned supervisory authorities following submission of
the DPC’s draft Decision to the co-operation mechanism
provided by Article 60 of the GDPR. The Decision of
January 2024 found that the legitimate interest relied
upon by Airbnb as the legal basis for the processing of the
individual’s ID under Article 6(1)(f) of the GDPR (including
to verify the authenticity of the request and to ensure user
accounts are not deleted inappropriately), did not constitute
a valid legal basis. While the DPC recognised the existence
of these interests, it found that in the circumstance of this
inquiry, Airbnb had not demonstrated that its request for
the complaint’s ID was necessary or proportionate for the
completion of the erasure request and could be achieved
through other means such as account login.
The DPC also found that Airbnb’s requirement that the
complainant verify their identity by submitting a copy of
their ID in order to make an erasure request constituted an

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

infringement of the principle of data minimisation, pursuant
to Article 5(1)(c) of the GDPR. The DPC was satisfied that
Airbnb complied with the principle of transparency and
provision of information under Article 13(1) of the GDPR.
The DPC issued a reprimand in light of the infringements
identified in accordance with its powers under Article 58(2)
(b) of the GDPR.

PAGE 53

Airbnb subsequently discontinued the practice of
requesting a copy of ID in order to verify erasure requests.
In addition, following an order made in a previous DPC
decision Airbnb confirmed to the DPC that it has revised
its internal policies and procedures to only request a user
provide ID where less privacy intrusive verification methods
are not available to prevent further infringements of Article
5(1)(c) of the GDPR occurring to data subjects in the future
similar to those that occurred in this instance.

Apple Distribution International Limited:
Lawfulness of retaining personal data following an erasure request
This inquiry, commenced in November 2022, concerns
a complaint that an erasure request in respect of a
user’s Apple ID was not properly complied with, and the
contention that Apple unlawfully retained the individual’s
email address associated with their Apple ID. This inquiry
examined the legal basis on which Apple relied to retain the
hashed value of the individual user’s email address following
action taken by Apple to give effect to the erasure request.
No relevant and reasoned objections were received from
concerned supervisory authorities following submission of
the DPC’s draft Decision to the co-operation mechanism
provided by Article 60 of the GDPR. The DPC’s Decision
issued in March 2024 found that Apple was and is entitled
to validly rely on the “legitimate interest” legal basis
for processing under Article 6(1)(f) of the GDPR for the
purpose of retaining a hashed value of the user’s email
address following the erasure request, including in order
to prevent the recycling of namespaces by users, and to
protect its users against fraud and security breaches by
third parties. The DPC was satisfied that Apple’s reliance
on the “legitimate interest” legal basis did not amount
to a contravention of Article 6 of the GDPR, and further
that Apple had complied with the user’s erasure request
and that it had not infringed Articles 12 and 17 of the
GDPR. However, the Decision did identify transparency
infringements and determined that Apple had infringed
Articles 13(1)(c) and 13(1)(d) of the GDPR in failing to inform
the user of its intention to retain the hashed value of
their email address and of the lawful basis and legitimate
interests for doing so.

The DPC issued a reprimand in light of the infringements
found, ordering Apple to address the transparency
deficiencies for users in the document entitled “Apple ID
Deletion Terms and Conditions” by early June 2024. It also
ordered Apple to provide details of the completion of the
project it was carrying out a review of the retention period
for the deletion of users’ hashed email addresses by 31
December 2024. Apple duly confirmed completion of that
project in December 2024.

This case illustrates how a DPC complaint based inquiry
found that a data controller seeking to give effect to
an individual’s GDPR rights failed to do so. The DPC’s
intervention and engagement resulted in an order for
the controller to revise its terms to ensure transparency
and provision of information to users, and ensured time
limits for erasure or a periodic review are in place.

PAGE 54

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

Apple Distribution International Limited:
Access Request for Personal Data held on a locked account
This inquiry commenced in February 2023 in relation to
an access request sent to Apple looking to obtain data on
a cloud-based account on the controller’s services. The
complainant claimed Apple had ignored their request and
they logged a complaint with the DPC.
As part of the engagement process, Apple stated that
it had responded to the complainant’s access request
without delay and Apple’s teams had attempted to assist
the complainant to verify their entitlement to obtain access
to the cloud account. As the complainant was not able to
progress through the security steps required to access
the account, Apple did not provide any personal data to
the complainant.
Apple outlined that it had provided the complainant with
information in compliance with Article 15(1) and Article 15(2)
of the GDPR by directing the complainant to its relevant
policies.
In relation to the “locked out” account, with which the
complainant claimed their personal data was associated,
Apple said it had an established process for ensuring
account security and for verifying entitlement to access
data associated with a unique account username. Apple
considered that this allowed them to satisfy the requirement
for controllers to both confirm the identity of natural persons
in the circumstances set out in Article 12(6) of the GDPR,
and to fulfil their security obligations under Article 32 of
the GDPR.
In this case, the complainant was unable to access emails
associated with an address connected to the cloud account.
Additionally, the complainant did not have a rescue email
address that could be used to assist with account recovery.
The individual had provided Apple with identity and other
documentation, which they believed were sufficient to
verify their entitlement to access the data on the account.
However, Apple stated it did not require copies of an ID
card or other official documentation during the registration
process for an account in order to verify that the name or
date of birth had been provided truthfully, or that the person
resided at the address provided by them. This was due to
the fact that Apple, in this context, was not seeking to verify
the identity of a customer but solely to associate certain data
to a specific customer using a registered username.
Apple’s position was that the account had most likely been
locked out as a result of the inputting of incorrect security
credentials. Asserting that without being confident that a
person was the account owner, they could not proceed with
an access request or to facilitate other data protection rights.

Apple stated that its security process would be weakened if
any person could access an account without having access
to the email address associated with it or having the ability
to answer basic security questions. Apple maintained that
allowing access in such circumstances would mean providing
access to the personal data on an account based on a claim
of one person, without a clear means of verifying that the
request was not malicious.
Apple considered that, in the specific circumstances,
adopting a cautious approach to providing access to an
account was fully warranted and, in fact, expected under
the GDPR.
Based on the information provided during the inquiry, the
DPC was satisfied that Apple complied with Article 12(4) of
the GDPR in relation to their response to the access request.
The DPC was also satisfied that Apple had complied with the
requirements of Article 15(1) and Article 15(2) in relation to
the information provided to the complainant.
In relation to the requirement of Article 15(3) to provide a
copy of personal data undergoing processing, the DPC was
satisfied that the only means by which Apple could have
provided this to the complainant was for the complainant to
access it themselves using the security credentials provided
when the account was set up. As these credentials remained
unavailable to the complainant, the only other means
available would have been for Apple to break their own
security requirements in order to access data.
The DPC found in its decision in February 2024 that Apple’s
handling of the access request was compliant with the
requirements of Article 12 and Article 15 of the GDPR and
with the Data Protection Act 2018. The DPC’s Draft Decision
had been submitted to the other Supervisory Authorities as
part of the Article 60 process and no relevant and reasoned
objections were received.

The case illustrates an example that in certain cases,
where an individual is unable to provide the required
security credentials in order to demonstrate their
entitlement to access data stored in a cloud service,
that the controller is not under an obligation to infringe
other requirements of the GDPR, such as the security
provisions, in order to allow access to an account under
an access request pursuant to Article 15 of the GDPR.

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

PAGE 55

Summary of DPC Decision Concerning
Groupon Ireland Operations Limited (Groupon).
The DPC received a complaint via the Baden-Wurttemburg
German Supervisory Authority in which the complainant
alleged they had unsuccessfully tried to submit a subject
access and erasure request with Groupon using the
advertised processes on the Groupon website. Having made
contact with the company, the complainant was directed to a
portal where they could submit their request. In response to
the request, Groupon requested the complainant to provide
a copy of an ID document in order to verify their identity,
which the complainant objected to. Groupon later changed
their ID requirements in October 2018 and invited the
complainant to submit a new request to enable Groupon to
process the request with their new procedures. However, the
complainant remained dissatisfied that all of their personal
data had subsequently been fully deleted in accordance with
their erasure request.
The DPC examined the complaint in order to determine
if (i) Groupon’s request for ID in order to verify the identity
of the complainant for the purposes of their original
access and erasure requests was compliant with Groupon’s
relevant obligations under the GDPR; and (ii) whether
Groupon had appropriately demonstrated that the
complainant’s personal data had been fully deleted in
response to their erasure request.
The DPC carried out an examination of Groupon’s databases
to further test Groupon’s evidence as to the full erasure of
the Complainant’s personal data. During this exercise, the
DPC verified that the Complainant’s personal data were not
returned in relation to a number of queries entered into
Groupon’s databases.
The DPC submitted its draft decision to fellow concerned
supervisory authorities through the co-operation mechanism
provided by Article 60 of the GDPR. Having received no
relevant and reasoned objections to the draft decision, all EU/
EEA regulators were therefore deemed to be in agreement
with the decision of the DPC.

In relation to Article 5(1)(c) for the personal data gathered
to be adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary in
relation to the purposes for which they are processed (data
minimisation) the DPC found that Groupon had infringed
Article 5(1)(c) by having initially required the complainant
to provide a copy of their ID in order to verify their identity
for the purposes of their access and erasure requests,
in circumstances where no such verification appeared to
have been obtained or required in order to initially open an
account and a less data-driven means of verification (namely,
by way of the email address associated with the account) was
available to Groupon.
The DPC found that Groupon infringed Article 12(2) of the
GDPR by initially requesting additional information as to the
complainant’s identity at the time they made their access
and erasure requests, in circumstances where it has not
demonstrated that reasonable doubts existed concerning
the complainant’s identity that would have necessitated that
application of Article 12(6) of the GDPR.
In addition, the DPC found that Groupon infringed Articles
15(1), 15(3) and 17(1) of the GDPR by having failed to comply
with the complainant’s initial access and erasure requests
at the time they were made without a lawful basis for not
complying, in circumstances where Groupon’s request (as a
prerequisite to responding to the initial access and erasure
requests) for photographic ID has been found to be an
infringement of Article 5(1)(c) of the GDPR.
Articles 6(1) of the GDPR relates to the lawfulness of
processing. The DPC found that Groupon infringed Article
6(1) of the GDPR by continuing to process the complainant’s
personal data after they received the data subject’s request
for erasure of their personal data.
The DPC’s decision found no infringement in relation to
whether Groupon had appropriately demonstrated that
the complainant’s personal data had been fully deleted in
response to the erasure request.
The final decision was adopted on 8 March 2024. That
final decision noted that Groupon no longer requires
photographic ID in order to verify a data subject’s identity for
the purposes of exercising their data subject rights under
GDPR, but also issued a reprimand to Groupon in light of the
infringements found under point (i).

PAGE 56

Enforcement of Corrective Powers exercised
by the DPC

An Garda Síochána
A December 2022 decision under the Law Enforcement
Directive transposition in the Data Protection Act 2018
required An Garda Síochána to implement appropriate
technical and organisational measures with regard to the
security of physical Intelligence Bulletin Boards throughout
the network of Garda stations. The decision arose on foot of
an inquiry that was commenced after a data breach in which
an electrical contractor had been given unsupervised access
to a Garda station and had posted images of the Intelligence
Bulletin Board onto social media. The personal data disclosed

in that data breach included information about criminal
convictions, suspicions of criminality and relationships
between persons of interest to An Garda Síochána.
In response to the decision, AGS revised its access policies
and all physical Intelligence Bulletin Boards were fully
decommissioned by May 2024.

Department of Health
The DPC issued a Final Decision to the Department of Health
in June 2023 following an inquiry into the Department’s
processing of personal data in 29 litigation files related to
claims from data subjects with special educational needs.
It made findings of infringement of Article 5(1)(c) (data
minimisation), 6(1), 6(4) and 9(2) of the GDPR (lawful basis
and conditions for processing special category data), 14
(transparency), and 5(1)(f) and 32(1) of the GDPR (security of
data processing). The corrective measures included a ban on
processing certain categories of records, a fine of €22,500,
and a reprimand.

The administrative fine was confirmed by the court and
the fine was paid in August 2024. In December 2024 the
Department confirmed that the necessary redactions/
removals had been implemented in accordance with the
Decision – apart from one file that was retained because
it was subject to live litigation.

PAGE 57

Facebook Ireland Limited (Facebook) (now known as Meta Platforms
Ireland Limited) (Meta): processing of children’s data via the Instagram
service operated by Facebook
In September 2022, the DPC adopted a Final Decision
regarding processing of children’s personal data on the
Instagram service, finding that Meta infringed Articles 6(1),
5(1)(a), 5(1)(c), 12(1), 24, 25(1), 25(2) and 35(1) of the GDPR.
The Final Decision imposed administrative fines totalling €405
million on Meta and also imposed a reprimand and an order
requiring Meta to bring its processing into compliance by
taking a range of specified remedial actions. Meta brought
legal proceedings to appeal the DPC Decision.

As a result of further engagement with the DPC, Meta
implemented further changes in December 2023:

Meta provided the DPC with a Compliance Report in
December 2022, setting out relevant changes to its
processing. The DPC circulated this Compliance Report
to the other Supervisory Authorities concerned, for
their consideration.

Having consulted the other Supervisory Authorities
concerned on the DPC’s assessment of the measures
adopted by Meta to comply with the order, the DPC
concluded the enforcement of the Decision in
December 2024.

Having examined the actions outlined in Meta’s Compliance
Report, the DPC was not satisfied with the nature and extent
of the measures adopted in relation to existing users:
•

The DPC highlighted that although Meta had now
introduced an option to select a “public” or “private”
audience setting when registering for Instagram, this
improvement only applied to new users, and not to
people who had registered previously; and

•

The DPC also highlighted that persons under the age
of 18 years using “Business Accounts” on Instagram
were given the option to publish their phone and/or
email contact information as part of their profile. The
DPC was not satisfied that Meta had demonstrated
measures to reduce the risk resulting from this feature.

•

Meta required all users under 18 years of age to
choose either a “public” or “private” account setting;
and

•

Meta removed the option for users under 18 years of
age to publish their off-Instagram contact information.

PAGE 58

DECISIONS AND INQUIRIES

TikTok Technology Limited (TikTok):
processing of children’s data via the TikTok service
In September 2023, the DPC adopted a Final Decision
regarding processing of children’s personal data on the
TikTok service, finding that TikTok infringed Articles 5(1)(a), 5(1)
(c), 5(1)(f), 12(1), 13(1)(e), 24(1), 25(1) and 25(2) of the GDPR.
The Final Decision imposed administrative fines totalling €345
million on TikTok and also imposed a reprimand and an order
requiring TikTok to bring its processing into compliance by
taking a range of specified remedial actions. TikTok brought
legal proceedings to appeal the DPC Decision.
TikTok provided the DPC with a Compliance Report in
December 2023, setting out relevant changes to its
processing. The DPC circulated this Compliance Report

to the other Supervisory Authorities concerned, for
their consideration.
Having examined TikTok’s Compliance Report, the DPC was
not satisfied with the nature and extent of the measures
adopted. The DPC highlighted to TikTok that the service
improvements did not apply to users aged 16 and 17 years
who registered before changes were implemented.
As a result of this further engagement with the DPC, TikTok
implemented additional improvements in January 2024,
requiring all child users aged 16 or 17 years to choose either
a “public” or “private” account setting.

Meta Platforms Ireland Limited (Meta):
Behavioural Advertising on the Instagram and Facebook services
Throughout 2023 and 2024, the DPC supervised compliance
with two orders made in December 2022 regarding the
Facebook and Instagram services. Those orders related
to findings made by the DPC that Meta could not rely on
Article 6(1)(b) of the GDPR to process personal data for the
purposes of behavioural advertising. The DPC’s supervision
of this compliance has involved assessing Meta’s subsequent
reliance on the legitimate interests lawful basis under Article
6(1)(f) of the GDPR, and more recently, its reliance on the
consent lawful basis under Article 6(1)(a) of the GDPR. In
November 2023, Meta launched a new consent model in

which users were offered a choice between subscribing to
receive Facebook and Instagram services without ads, or
alternatively, agreeing to receive personalised and nonpersonalised ads to use the services without paying a fee.
In November 2024, Meta announced that it will offer people
in the EU an additional new choice to use Facebook and
Instagram for free with fewer personalised ads. At year’s
end, the DPC continued to assess this matter in light of the
updated model.

Galway County Council:
surveillance technologies deployed by local authority
The DPC adopted a final decision in this inquiry in August
2023. The decision followed a data protection audit, which
examined a range of issues including CCTV systems, APRN
technology, and body worn cameras. The decision found
infringements in relation to sections 70, 71, 72, 75 78, 82 and
84 of the Data Protection Act 2018 and Articles 5(1)(a), 24(1)
and 35(1) of the GDPR. The DPC ordered the Council to bring
its processing into compliance by ceasing unlawful processing
via CCTV, erecting properly worded signage and implementing
appropriate technical and organisational measures to bring
processing into compliance. The DPC subsequently received a

report from the Council outlining the actions that it had taken
to comply with the corrective measures.
In order to ensure that the orders contained in the final
decision had been fully complied with, the DPC conducted
an on-site inspection in February 2024. The DPC was able
to verify that the Council had implemented the measures
outlined in its compliance report, such as removing unlawful
CCTV and erecting appropriate signage. Accordingly, the DPC
was satisfied that the Council had brought its processing
operations into compliance with the final decision.

5
Litigation

PAGE 59

PAGE 60

LITIGATION

Litigation
Judgments Delivered and Final Orders made in 2024
No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

1

High Court
Record No.
2023/88
MCA

Julian de Spáinn v
An Coimiusiún Um
Chosaint Sonraí

Statutory Appeal

Judgment of the High
Court delivered on 31
January 2024

Proceedings concluded

High Court

Order of the High
Court 11 March 2024
(as amended on 11
September 2024)

Outcome:

In response to a Motion brought by the DPC, the High Court
made an order annulling two decisions of the DPC and
remitting the underlying complaints to the DPC for fresh
consideration on their merits.
The proceedings arose from complaints made by Mr de
Spáinn against Bank of Ireland and Aer Lingus alleging that,
by refusing to apply diacritical marks (specifically the síneadh
fada) to his name and address as it appeared in the data
controllers’ IT systems, the controllers had breached Mr de
Spáinn’s right to rectification under Article 16 of the GDPR.  

The complaints were resolved in favour of the data
controller, following which an appeal was brought by
Mr de Spáinn.
The DPC indicated its willingness to re-examine the
complaints afresh and on application from the DPC,
the Court acceded to that proposal.

LITIGATION

PAGE 61

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

2

High Court
Record
No. 2022
1823P

Gray, Meegan,
Mullan, Mullins,
Geary & Scanlan
v Data Protection
Commission, Ireland
& The Attorney
General, Grant
Thornton (A Firm)
and Grant Thornton
Corporate Finance
Limited

Plenary
Proceedings

Judgment of the High
Court delivered on 21
March 2024

Proceedings concluded

High Court

Outcome:

For the reasons set out in a judgment delivered on
21 March 2024 (Stack J), the High Court struck out the
proceedings on the basis that they were frivolous and
vexatious, had no reasonable prospect of success, and
were bound to fail.
The proceedings had their origin in a data breach in which
the personal data of a number of individuals was released
by Grant Thornton to a third party. That data breach gave
rise to a multiplicity of proceedings.
The High Court found that the issues raised in these
proceedings had already been decided in earlier

Order of the High Court
dated 21 March 2024

proceedings, or was the subject of further proceedings that
had not yet been decided. For that reason, the Court ruled
that these proceedings were at least in part an
abuse of process.
The proceedings were therefore struck out [and the
Court ordered that certain of the plaintiffs who had been
involved in the hearing, namely the first, second, third
and fifth defendants, should pay the DPC’s costs]. The
plaintiffs applied for leave to appeal against the High Court’s
judgment directly to the Supreme Court. That application
was refused by a determination of that Court made on 3
September 2024.

PAGE 62

LITIGATION

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

3

High Court
Record No.
2022/
283JR

Peter Nowak v Courts
Service & Data
Protection Commission (Notice Party)

Judicial Review

Judgment of the High
Court delivered on 20
March 2024

Proceedings concluded

High Court

Outcome:

By Orders made on 23 November 2021, the Circuit Court
dismissed four separate appeals brought by Mr Nowak
against decisions of the DPC. Subsequently, Mr Nowak
sought to appeal the Circuit Court Orders. To that end,
Notices of Appeal were delivered to the High Court Central
Office. In the event, the Central Office declined to accept
the Notices of Appeal on the grounds that they were out
of time. In response, Mr Nowak brought Judicial Review
proceedings against the Courts Service (naming the DPC
as a Notice Party), contesting the Central Office’s refusal to
accept his Notices of Appeal.

By written Judgment delivered on 20 March 2024, the High
Court (O’Donnell J) refused to extend time for the filing of
the appeals (noting that Mr Nowak had failed/refused to
ask the Court to extend time, and there being no other
evidential basis on which to do so).
Costs were ordered against Mr Nowak.

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

4

Court of
Appeal
Record No.
2024/113

Peter Nowak v
Courts Service &
Data Protection
Commission (Notice
Party)

Appeal of High
Court Judgment
(in relation to the
JR listed at Entry
#3 above)

Judgment, 8 November
2024

Proceedings concluded

Court of Appeal

Outcome:

By written judgement delivered on 8 November 2024, the
Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal by Mr Nowak and a
Judgment and Order of the High Court in which that Court
had refused to extend the time for the filing of appeals by
Mr Nowak against a series of decisions made by the DPC
in response to complaints it had received from Mr Nowak.
(See Entry #3 above).
The Court awarded costs against Mr Nowak.

LITIGATION

PAGE 63

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

5

Court of
Appeal
Record No.
2023/280

David Fox v
Data Protection
Commission

Appeal from the
High Court

Judgment of the Court of
Appeal delivered on 25
April 2024

Proceedings concluded

Court of Appeal

Outcome:

On 14 November 2019, the DPC delivered a decision in
relation to a complaint made by Mr Fox against the National
Gallery of Ireland. Of the 7 points raised by Mr Fox in his
complaint, 4 were upheld by the DPC and 3 were rejected.
Mr Fox subsequently brought an appeal against the DPC’s
decision to reject 3 of the points canvassed in his complaint.
In a written Judgment delivered on 25 April 2022, the
Circuit Court rejected the appeal, finding that, taking the
adjudicative process as a whole, the DPC had fully and fairly
considered all elements of the complaint and had come to
a determination that was logical and appropriate bearing in
mind the law in this area.
Mr Fox next brought an appeal (on a point of law) against
the Judgment and Order of the Circuit Court. In its judgment
of 25 September 2023, the High Court dismissed that
appeal, noting that Mr Fox had failed to identify any point
of law and so the High Court had no jurisdiction. The High
Court separately found that the points Mr Fox had sought
to raise on appeal amounted to (i) an attempt to re-run the
process that had taken place before the DPC, and (ii) an
invitation to the court to reach a different decision based on
bare assertions which were unsupported by
any evidence.

By written judgment delivered on 25 April 2024, the Court
of Appeal dismissed Mr Fox’s further appeal from the
Judgment of the High Court. The Court held that as the
appellant’s notice of appeal made no reference to the first,
and fundamental, determination of the High Court that
it had no jurisdiction to entertain the appellant’s appeal
(because the notice of motion identified no point of law),
this appeal must also fail. However, the Court went on to
consider the points raised by the Appellant, having noted
that this was not a case in which defects in the Notice of
Appeal could have been saved by an amendment to that
document. This was because it would have been difficult, if
not impossible, to reframe any of the grounds pleaded by
the appellant, or even those raised in submissions, as points
of law. The Court held that, at its simplest, the Appellant
simply disagreed with the DPC’s decision and wanted the
Court to put itself in the position of the DPC and to consider
the DPC’s afresh and on its merits. Such an appeal was not
open to the Appellant.
Costs were awarded to the DPC.
The Appellant next applied for leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court. This was refused by way of a Supreme
Court determination dated 19 July 2024.

PAGE 64

LITIGATION

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

6

High Court
Record No.
2022 339/
MCA

Meta Platforms
Ireland Ltd v
Data Protection
Commission

Application for a
stay

Judgment dated 10 May
2024

High Court

The DPC appealed the
High Court’s judgment to
the Court of Appeal.

Order dated 30 May
2024

Outcome:

By way of written judgment delivered on 10 May 2024, the
High Court acceded to an application by Meta Platforms
Ireland Limited (Meta) for an order adjourning the entirety
of Meta’s appeal (and related judicial review proceedings)
against a decision made by the DPC on 25 November 2022,
pending the outcome of separate proceedings before the
General Court of the European Union.
Background to the proceedings
By decision dated 25 November 2022, the DPC made
certain findings against Meta arising from a data breach in
which the personal data of approximately 500m users was
“scraped” from the Facebook platform and published on
the internet.
The DPC made the following orders in the exercise of its
corrective powers:
1. An order directing Meta to bring its processing into
compliance within a period of 3 months, by taking
specified steps to secure users’ data and mitigate
against the risk of such data being “scraped”
by third parties;
2. A Reprimand in respect of the infringements identified
in the Decision; and
3. Administrative fines in the amounts of €150 million and
€115 million, respectively.

The appeal was heard
on 10 February 2025.
Judgment is awaited.

Meta appealed the DPC decision and also issued parallel
judicial review proceedings.  Meta then brought a motion
seeking an order adjourning the domestic proceedings
pending the final determination of separate proceedings
before the CJEU. The DPC opposed that application,
contending that with the exception of one discrete element,
the appeal should be progressed without delay.
Following a contested hearing, the High Court held that
the appeal (and related judicial review proceedings) should
be adjourned in their entirety to await the outcome of the
proceedings pending before the CJEU.
On 30 May 2024, the Court awarded Meta its costs of the
adjournment application. The Judgment was subsequently
appealed by the DPC. A hearing date in the Court of Appeal
was awaited at year’s end.

LITIGATION

PAGE 65

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

7

Court of
Appeal
Record No.
2023/282

Johnny Ryan -vData Protection
Commission &
Google Ireland Ltd (as
Notice Party)

Appeal from the
High Court

24th of June 2024

Proceedings concluded

Court of Appeal

Outcome:

By way of written judgment delivered on 24 June 2024 the
Court of Appeal dismissed Mr Ryan’s appeal from an earlier
Judgment and Order of the High Court in which the High
Court upheld a (procedural) decision of the DPC to complete
its “own-volition” inquiry into Google’s “real-time bidding”
online advertising systems before separately considering
a complaint in which an additional issue was raised by Mr
Ryan in relation to those systems.

In a written Judgment delivered on 28 August 2023, the High
Court (Simons J) dismissed the judicial review proceedings,
noting that the GDPR affords discretion to supervisory
authorities in terms of their approach to the sequencing of
investigations. The Court further held that it was reasonable
and proportionate for the DPC to have decided to complete
its own-volition inquiry first, before turning to the
Applicant’s complaint.

Background to the appeal
After it had commenced an own-volition inquiry into
Google’s Real Time Bidding (RTB) systems, the DPC was
called on by Mr Ryan to separately investigate a complaint in
which Mr Ryan called into question the lawfulness of certain
other aspects of the same systems. The DPC declined to
do so, taking the view that it would be more efficient (and
more effective) to complete its own-volition inquiry before
considering whether or not to go on to deal with the
particular objection raised by Mr Ryan.

In a written Judgment delivered on 24 June 2024, the Court
of Appeal upheld the Judgment of the High Court. The
Court found no error in the conclusion of the High Court
that the decision of the DPC to prioritise the own-volition
inquiry and defer the handling of Mr Ryan’s complaint was
proportionate and well within the margin of appreciation
allowed to supervisory authorities. Costs were awarded to
the DPC.

Mr Ryan brought judicial review proceedings seeking orders
compelling the DPC to investigate his complaint.

Mr Ryan subsequently sought leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court. That application was refused by a
determination made on 21 October 2024.

PAGE 66

LITIGATION

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

8

High Court
Record No.
2023/179
CA

Peter Nowak v Data
Protection Commission

Appeal on a point
of law

Judgment dated 2 July
2024

High Court

Order of 8 October 2024

The Appellant has brought
a further appeal to the
Court of Appeal. That
appeal is listed for hearing
on 18 March 2025.

Outcome:

By way of written judgment delivered on 2 July 2024, the
High Court dismissed Mr Nowak’s appeal on a point of law
from an earlier decision of the Circuit Court.
These proceedings have their original in a complaint made
by Mr Nowak in 2010, which ultimately led to a Judgment
of the CJEU in which that Court held that, in the exercise of
his right of access to personal data, Mr Nowak was entitled
to access to his examination scripts in respect of certain
professional accountancy examinations Mr Nowak had sat
some years previously. Sometime after Mr Nowak secured
access to his examination scripts in 2018, he contended that
certain other aspects of his 2010 complaint had not been
addressed by the DPC. The aspects in question were

identified by Mr Nowak in 2020. By decision dated 21 April
2022, the DPC ruled against Mr Nowak on each of those
other aspects.
Mr Nowak appealed that decision to the Circuit Court. His
appeal was rejected by the Circuit Court for the reasons set
out in a written judgment dated 9 October 2023
(O’Connor J).
Mr Nowak next brought a further appeal (on a point of law)
to the High Court.
By written judgment dated 2 July 2024, the High Court
(Bradley J) dismissed Mr Nowak’s further appeal and
awarded costs against Mr Nowak

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

9

High Court
Record No.
2024/81 JR

Google Ireland
Limited v Data
Protection
Commission

Judicial Review

Judgment of the High
Court delivered on 11
October 2024.

Proceedings concluded

High Court
Order dated 5 November
2024

Outcome:

On 23 October 2023, the DPC commenced an inquiry into a
series of 6 complaints against Google Ireland Limited, from
data subjects in several European countries, alleging that
Google’s account opening processes involved the unlawful
processing of users’ personal data.
Google brought Judicial Review proceedings in which it
alleged that the DPC’s decision to commence its inquiry was
unlawful because, as at the date of commencement of the
inquiry, it had failed to examine and conclusively determine
a series of questions relating to the admissibility of
the complaints.

Whilst the Court found that the DPC did not have all relevant
and necessary information to hand at the point at which it
commenced its inquiry, it found that the DPC was entitled to
rely on information it obtained from the complainants after
the date of commencement of the inquiry in circumstances
where that information would have been available to the
DPC if it sought access to it at the appropriate time. On that
basis, the Court exercised its discretion to allow the inquiry
to continue (save in respect of one of the six complaints).
The Court ordered the DPC to pay 70% of Google’s costs.

LITIGATION

PAGE 67

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

10

Dublin
Circuit
Court
Record No.
2024/1054

Owen V. McGinty v
The Data Protection
Commissioner

Statutory Appeal

Judgment of the Circuit
Court delivered on 15
October 2024

Proceedings concluded

Circuit Court
Circuit Court Order
dated 15 October 2024

Outcome:

By way of written Judgment delivered on 15 October 2024,
the Circuit Court found that an appeal brought by Mr
McGinty against an earlier decision of the DPC could not be
pursued because it was time-barred.
The DPC decision in question was issued on 6 February
2024. In it, the DPC declined to uphold a complaint made by
Mr McGinty against the Workplace Relations Commission in
which, relying on Article 16 of the GDPR, Mr McGinty
demanded amendments to a statutory decision made by an

Equality Officer in 2012 in response to a separate and much
earlier complaint brought under equality legislation. (Such
amendments were sought on grounds that the Equality
Office’s decision contained inaccurate personal data relating
to Mr McGinty).
Mr McGinty appealed the DPC’s decision to the Circuit Court
but the appeal was filed late. The appeal was duly struck out
by the Circuit Court.

PAGE 68

LITIGATION

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

11

High Court
Record No.
2024/411
MCA

Data Protection
Commission v Twitter
International Ltd.

Section 134, Data
Protection Act
2018 application.

6th of August 2024

Proceedings concluded

High Court

Outcome:

On 8 August 2024, the DPC brought an urgent application
before Judge Leonie Reynolds in the High Court under
Section 134 of the Data Protection Act 2018 in which it
requested the Court to prohibit the processing by X of
personal data contained in the public posts of X’s EU/EEA
users for the purpose of training its AI tool, “Grok”.

The Court was satisfied that there was an urgency to the
DPC’s application in this case.

This was the first time that the DPC had brought
proceedings under Section 134, being a provision of the
Data Protection Act 2018 which allows the Commission,
where it considers that there is an urgent need to act to
protect the rights and freedoms of data subjects, to make
an application to the High Court for an order requiring
the data controller to suspend, restrict or prohibit the
processing of personal data.

The Court was satisfied that the undertakings in question
met the situation in terms of protecting the data in question
until such time as the proceedings were the subject of a
determination by the Court.

In answer to the application, X agreed to give certain
undertakings to the Court to suspend its processing of an
identified body of personal data.

On 4 September 2024, when the matter came back before
the Court, the proceedings were struck-out on the basis
of X’s agreement to continue to adhere to the terms of the
undertakings given on 8 August 2024 on a permanent basis.

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

12

Court of
Appeal
Record.
No.
2024/17

Martin Meany v
Data Protection
Commission

Court of Appeal
(Appeal of High
Court Costs
Order)

Order dated 1 August
2024

Proceedings concluded

Outcome:

On 3 October 2022, Mr Meany brought Judicial Review
proceedings against the DPC, alleging that it had failed to
issue a decision in respect of a complaint Mr Meany had
filed with the DPC in relation to certain Church authorities.
The proceedings were rendered moot when the DPC
delivered its decision in relation to Mr Meany’s complaint on
23 June 2023. (The complaint was not upheld). In advance
of that date, the DPC had alerted Mr Meany to the fact that
it would not decide his complaint until it had first completed
an own-volition inquiry into the handling of Church records
more generally within certain dioceses in the State.

In an ex tempore judgment delivered on 20 December
2023, the High Court ordered that the proceedings be
struck out as they were moot. It directed that there should
be no order as to costs.
Mr Meany in turn appealed the costs element of that Order
to the Court of Appeal. On consent, the Court of Appeal
agreed (on 1 August 2024) to make an order directing that:
1. the appeal be struck out; and
2. the DPC pay the Appellant’s costs in the High Court
proceedings (bearing Record No. 2022/820JR) up to
the date of the ex tempore judgment delivered on 20
December 2023.
3. No Order as to costs in respect of the Court of
Appeal proceedings.

LITIGATION

PAGE 69

No.

Record
No.

Title

Type of action
and venue

Date of Judgment/
Order

Current Status

13

Circuit
Court
Record No.
2023
/05049

Sonzic Francis v
Data Protection
Commissioners &
Dyson Ireland Ltd,
Briscoes Electrical
Arnotts and Arnotts
Brown Thomas as
Notice Parties

Statutory Appeal

Circuit Court Order
dated 14 May 2024

Proceedings concluded

Circuit Court

Outcome:

Ms Francis brought a statutory appeal, purporting to
challenge a “decision” of the DPC.
On 14 May 2024, the Circuit Court made an order
dismissing Ms Francis’ appeal in circumstances where the
Court found that Ms Francis’ underlying complaint had not
been decided but was still being actively investigated by
the DPC.

The Circuit Court found that it had no jurisdiction to deal
with the appeal in circumstances where no decision had yet
been made by the DPC.
No order was made on costs.

6
PAGE 70

Supervision

SUPERVISION

PAGE 71

Supervision
The fifth goal of the DPC’s Regulatory Strategy is to support organisations
and drive compliance. Supervisory engagement with organisations in
all sectors allows the DPC to understand how they process personal
data, and how they meet their compliance requirements as data
controllers. This aligns with the DPC’s task as a supervisory authority
under GDPR to promote the awareness of organisations of their data
protection obligations. By engaging in this manner the DPC can support
organisations in identifying potential data protection issues in the
development of new products or services, and advise on implementing
best practice compliance solutions at the earliest opportunity, in line with
the principle of data protection by design. This work takes on a particular
focus where the DPC is the Lead Supervisory Authority and can discuss
and engage with companies planning to launch of new products or
services in the EU/ EEA market.
The DPC adopts an open and communicative approach with
the organisations that it regulates, in addition to sectoral
representative bodies, DPO networks and legislators, as a
key method to drive compliance, accountability and a wider
culture of data protection awareness.
Proactive engagement with organisations in the development
of new data processing operations or projects allows the
DPC to advocate strongly for the upholding of the data
protection rights of individuals by mitigating against potential
infringements before they occur. Although resource intensive,

supporting organisations and driving compliance ultimately
leads to better outcomes for individuals as customers, service
users and citizens.
If during engagement with the supervision function it appears
that the organisation may be infringing or likely to infringe
data protection law, the DPC can take relevant enforcement
action in such circumstances. This approach supports the
DPC’s efforts to place resources where they can achieve
the most good, in a risk-based manner, and produce better
results for all stakeholders.

PAGE 72

SUPERVISION

The DPC had 757 supervision
engagements during 2024. The
sectoral breakdown is as follows:
Law
Enforcement

Health

Public Sector

14

81

40

Charities/
Voluntary Bodies

Children/Family

Private Sector &
Financial

30

43

121

Multinational
Technology

Other

Total

421

7

757

In addition, across all sectors the DPC engaged in 291
supervision meetings with organisations in 2024. It can
be observed from the above that a significant amount
of DPC engagement is with the multi-technology sector.

This proactive engagement involves regular consultation,
engagement and follow-up, both with the controllers involved
and the DPC’s peer regulators with the aim of ensuring
regulatory consistency across the European Union.

SUPERVISION

PAGE 73

Legislative Consultation
A key statutory function of the DPC is prior consultation on
legislative measures that relate to data processing. Both the
GDPR and Data Protection Act 2018 require Government
Departments to consult the DPC on any legislative or
regulatory measures that will involve data processing. This
is of particular importance where legislation is creating a
new legal basis for the processing of personal data by public
bodies or agencies.
In this consultation process, the DPC works with those
drafting legislation to ensure that legislation requiring the
processing of personal data is clear, precise, and foreseeable
in its effect. Additionally, the DPC seeks to ensure that where
legislation underpins the processing of personal data it is
clear that this will be necessary to meet a clear objective of
public interest, and is proportionate to the aim that
it pursues.
Where necessary to meet the requirements of GDPR, in
particular where special categories of personal data are
concerned, the DPC provides advice on how legislative
measures can implement safeguards to protect the rights

and freedoms of affected individuals. Additionally, the DPC
helps to ensure that any proposed restriction of data subjects
in new legislation meets the requirements of Article 23
of the GDPR. Any such restriction must be necessary and
proportionate in safeguarding a clear public interest and
respect the essence of the fundamental rights and freedoms
in question.
The DPC provided guidance and observations on 56
proposed legislative measures in 2024 including:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

The Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2024;
The Automatic Enrolment Retirement Savings System
Act 2024;
The Health Information Bill 2024;
The Mental Health Bill 2024;
Garda Síochána (Recording Devices)(Amendment) Bill;
S.I. No. 216/2024 - Garda SÍochána (Recording Devices)
Act 2023 (Code of Practice); and
Seanad Electoral University Members Amendment Bill
2024.

PAGE 74

SUPERVISION

Regulatory engagement
Local authorities and CCTV
Over the course of 2024, the DPC continued to offer guidance
and support to local authorities on their use of CCTV and
other recording devices for combatting certain waste and
litter pollution offences, following the implementation of
statutory codes of practice for these activities in 2023. In
addition, the DPC continued to conduct inquiries during the
year into the usage of CCTV by certain local authorities (see
Annual Report 2023).

CCTV and Data Protection Impact Assessments
(DPIAs)
In July 2024, the DPC received a consultation request from
a Local Authority (Council) for a proposed community
CCTV scheme. In line with their obligations under the Law
Enforcement Directive, the Council carried out a Data
Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA), which they shared with
the DPC for review. The Law Enforcement Directive regulates
the processing of personal data for the purpose of the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal
offences or the execution of criminal penalties. It is the
relevant part of the data protection legislative framework for
data processing by Councils for law enforcement purposes,
rather than the GDPR.
In their DPIA, the council had correctly identified two potential
risks resulting from the CCTV scheme. These risks involved

the excessive surveillance of members of the public and the
possible monitoring of individuals within private dwellings.
However, in terms of mitigations, the Council’s DPIA stated
that the CCTV scheme was very popular locally and proposed
“consideration of public feedback” as a possible solution to
these identified risks.
The DPC replied that this proposed mitigation did not appear
adequate as it suggested that risks to data subject rights
would be automatically mitigated if the processing were
supported by the local community.
The DPC’s recommendations to the Council were to
implement measures that would tangibly address the
identified risks. These included the repositioning of cameras
to avoid excessive surveillance of publicly accessible areas,
and the reduction of the number of cameras to cover areas
that are considered strictly necessary to address public order
and safety issues identified in the scheme.
This example illustrates that while canvassing the views of
stakeholders, including the public, can be a valuable part
of the DPIA process, risks to the rights and freedoms of
individuals cannot be collectively waived through public
consultation alone. The fact that a CCTV scheme is popular
locally does not relieve the obligation on local authorities to
consider potential risks to affected individuals in a clear-eyed
manner and to put in place effective safeguards to prevent
excessive surveillance/ monitoring of individuals.

SUPERVISION

PAGE 75

CCTV and Transparency

CCTV and Littering

In September 2024, the DPC received a query from a Council
on the extent of its obligations to erect signs informing
members of the public of the operation of a CCTV scheme in
their county town. While the codes of practice developed by
the Local Government Management Agency (LGMA) state that
signs should be “at or in close proximity to each camera”, the
council expressed concern that this would not be appropriate
and could interfere with the purpose of the scheme.

In September 2024, the DPC also became aware of
media reporting which claimed that local authorities were
prohibited from using CCTV to investigate littering and waste
management offences on data protection grounds, except
where a motor vehicle was used in the commission of the
offence. This claim originated from an interview with a council
official in which the Council’s implementation of the recently
finalised LGMA codes of practice was discussed.

The council proposed an alternative approach whereby large
signs would be placed on roads leading into the town warning
that CCTV was in operation at unspecified locations in the
town centre. The DPC replied that this alternative approach
appeared to contradict the plain meaning of the codes, which
reflect the Council’s transparency obligations under the Law
Enforcement Directive. The DPC advised the Council that they
should place appropriate signs at each location where CCTV
is deployed, in line with the right of affected individuals to
be properly informed about the processing of their data.
This example illustrates the importance of providing
adequate transparency information to the public on use
of CCTV.

Failure to put in place appropriate signage for CCTV risks
inadvertently engaging in covert surveillance.

Suspecting that this claim stemmed from a misapprehension
of some kind, the DPC contacted the council to seek further
clarification. It transpired that, rather than the council
considering that they were legally prohibited from using
CCTV footage to investigate such offences, the issue was that
CCTV footage is generally of limited investigative value where
there is no information (such as a vehicle licence plate) that
can be directly linked to an identifiable individual. Nothing
in data protection law prevents a local authority from using
CCTV footage to investigate illegal dumping based on whether
or not the suspect is operating a motor vehicle. However,
this case illustrates why CCTV should not be regarded as a
“silver bullet” solution to the challenge of combatting waste
management and litter pollution offences. Local authorities
can and should use CCTV to the extent that it is objectively
effective in the circumstances and as part of a broader range
of measures.

Covert surveillance is generally unlawful and should only
be used in very exceptional circumstances, reflecting the
much more significant level of interference with the rights of
affected individuals that is involved. The Council’s proposals in
this case were not compliant because they sought to blur this
distinction by not providing a reasonable level of information
to the public about the location of the CCTV.

As the above case studies illustrate, the DPC is committed
to assisting local authorities in their use of CCTV in a data
protection-compliant manner and welcomes the fact that
they now enjoy a clear legal framework to use these tools
under the Garda Síochána Act, 2005 and the Circular
Economy and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 2022 which were
introduced specifically to remedy issues highlighted in DPC
decisions.

PAGE 76

SUPERVISION

Law Enforcement and Body-Worn Cameras–
Inland Fisheries Ireland

Law Enforcement and body worn cameras –
An Garda Síochána

A key theme for the DPC in 2024 was engagement with
several public bodies on their adoption and deployment of
recording devices, such as body-worn cameras and drone
technology, in support of their law enforcement activities. As
the following examples illustrate, the DPC’s objective through
this engagement is to ensure that these public bodies have
an appropriate legal basis in place beforehand so that the
conditions around the use of these devices are clear, precise
and foreseeable to affected individuals.

In March 2024, An Garda Síochána formally consulted with
the DPC on its draft code of practice for the deployment of
body worn cameras under the Garda Síochána (Recording
Devices) Act 2023.

In February 2024, the DPC received a consultation request
from Inland Fisheries Ireland (IFI) regarding a pilot project on
the deployment of body-worn cameras on staff. The IFI had
identified a business need to deploy body-worn cameras in
order to discourage harassment and intimidation of its staff
in the context of inspections, but also to use the footage to
investigate and prosecute offences under fisheries legislation.
The DPC noted that the pilot project was at an advanced
stage: The IFI had already procured the devices and
organised staff training. The DPC reviewed the materials
provided and noted that, although the IFI had put in place a
range of policies and safeguards for the use of the cameras,
it did not appear to have an appropriate legal basis for
the underlying processing of personal data under current
fisheries legislation.
The DPC advised that in order to meet the requirements
of data protection law, the IFI would need to identify a
legal basis that explicitly empowered it to operate mobile
recording devices in pursuit of its law enforcement functions.
Examples of such legal bases used by other law enforcement
authorities in Ireland are the codes of practice being
prepared by An Garda Síochána under the Garda Síochána
(Recording Devices) Act 2023, or those prepared by the
Local Government Management Agency under the Circular
Economy and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 2022.
The DPC concluded that unless and until the IFI could put in
place such a legal basis, it would likely only be able use these
devices in a limited manner to protect the safety and welfare
of its employees, but that any resulting footage could not be
retained and used to investigate fisheries offences.
In 2025, the DPC planned to continue to engage with IFI on
the establishment of a clear legal basis for the lawful use of
Body Worn Cameras by its authorised officers.

The DPC conducted a thorough review of the draft code,
including a site visit to Garda Headquarters to view the
technology in operation and to assess the appropriateness
of the technical and organisational safeguards in place. In its
opinion on the code, the DPC emphasised the importance of
the code providing sufficient detail on the circumstances in
which Garda members will use body-worn cameras.
This is necessary in order for the code to provide a valid
legal basis for processing personal data that meets the
requirements of the Law Enforcement Directive. If the
finalised code were to contain language that is too imprecise,
reflecting mere guidance or statements of best practice,
then there is a risk that the code itself as well any convictions
based on camera footage, may be open to legal challenge.
This consultation process with An Garda Síochána was
ongoing at year’s end to ensure that the final code allows
Garda members to use these tools in a data protectioncompliant manner.

SUPERVISION

Law Enforcement - Drone Technology Revenue
Commissioners
In August 2024, the DPC became aware through media
reporting that the Revenue Commissioners was planning a
pilot project on the use of drone technology in support of its
customs enforcement functions. The DPC began an informal
consultation process with the Revenue Commissioners in
order to learn more about this pilot project and the lawful
basis for processing. While this process remained ongoing at
year’s end, the DPC advised the Revenue Commissioners of
the importance of ensuring a sufficiently robust legal basis
for the use of these technologies if they are to be used in a
sustainable manner in the long term.
The DPC recognises the value of the use of mobile and
portable recording devices by law enforcement authorities
and is committed to supporting these authorities in rolling
out these tools in a data protection compliant manner.

As the above examples illustrate, it is particularly
important that any public authority considering
the adoption of these tools ensures that they have
an appropriate legal basis in place prior to the
commencement of processing.

Failure to do so not only presents a serious risk to the
fundamental rights of affected persons, but also risks the
safety of any criminal convictions based upon evidence
gathered with such tools. The use of such tools for law
enforcement purposes is permissible under the LED once
the requirements of data protection law are met.

PAGE 77

Facial Recognition Technology
In June 2024, the DPC participated in a roundtable event
coordinated by the Irish Council for Civil Liberties on the
use of Facial Recognition Technology in law enforcement.
Other stakeholders attended this event from Ireland and
abroad, including representatives of the American Civil
Liberties Union. The event provided an opportunity to discuss
situations of wrongfully arrest and detention if errors in
Facial Recognition Technology (FRT) products result in the
misidentification by police forces of an individual as a suspect
in a crime they did not commit.
This discussion proved valuable to the DPC as part of the
wider consideration of the use of FRT in policing, in the
context of the DPC’s statutory consultation on the Garda
Síochána (Recording Devices) (Amendment) Bill 2023, which
is intended to provide An Garda Síochána with access to this
technology. During 2024, the DPC advised An Garda Síochána
of the importance of ensuring that any implementation
of FRT in Ireland takes into consideration the significant
implications that it can have for individuals and groups of
people, including minorities, and that consequently sufficient
safeguards are put in place to mitigate any risk arising from
the deployment of this technology and the processing of
personal data in this context.

PAGE 78

Irish Association for Counselling and
Psychotherapy webinars
In line with Goal 5 of the DPC’s Regulatory Strategy 20222027, which commits to supporting organisations of all sizes
and driving compliance, the DPC delivered several online
sessions tailored for charities and voluntary organisations
in the health and social care sector during 2024. These
sessions built upon the DPC’s 2023 engagement and directly
addressed the data protection challenges faced by the notfor-profit sector. This included two webinars for members
of the Irish Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy
(IACP).
The webinars covered crucial topics such as data breaches,
requests from law enforcement bodies such as An Garda
Síochána for information on patients, and data subject
access requests from clients. Each session was designed
to be interactive, allowing participants to ask questions
and share experiences, to voice their concerns and receive
real-time insights which allowed peer-to-peer learning.
The engagement levels were high, with an average of 400
attendees per session, representing a variety of charities,
voluntary organisations, and independent practitioners
across the country.
To further support the practitioners, the DPC compiled
a comprehensive Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
document based on the issues raised during the webinars.
This document serves as an ongoing resource, addressing
common concerns and providing practical guidance on data
protection compliance. Feedback from participants has
been overwhelmingly positive, with 90% reporting that the
webinars significantly improved their understanding of
their data protection responsibilities. Many attendees
expressed appreciation for the tailored content and the
opportunity to discuss sector-specific challenges. This
initiative has not only enhanced compliance awareness but
has also strengthened the DPC’s relationship with the charity
sector, paving the way for more targeted support in the
future.
The DPC will continue working with representative bodies
in the charity and voluntary sector during 2025 to identify
opportunities for proactive engagement, and improved
compliance.

90%

reported that the webinars significantly
improved their understanding of
data protection

SUPERVISION

Sports survey
Following its comprehensive examination of data protection
issues in sports initiated in 2023, the DPC has made
significant progress in understanding the complex landscape
of data processing in both professional and amateur sports
in Ireland. In line with Goal 3 of the Regulatory Strategy, the
DPC has focused on the handling of children’s data and the
increasing use of technology for performance monitoring and
other purposes.
In order to establish an understanding of the data protection
awareness of key actors in this area, in February 2024, the
DPC issued a questionnaire to 110 sports clubs across
Ireland from major participation sports, including the Gaelic
Athletic Association, Ladies Gaelic Football Association, Irish
Rugby Federation Union, and Football Association of Ireland.
This survey was designed to assess the current state of data
protection compliance and to gain deeper insights into the
relationships between various parties involved in sports and
their data sharing arrangements. The questionnaire covered
critical areas such as the use of technology in collecting and
analysing player performance data, the purposes of data
processing, and the transparency of data handling practices,
with a particular emphasis on how children and young people
are informed about the processing of their personal data.
The survey findings revealed several concerns: over 40%
of respondents reported not having any formal data
protection policies in place. Half of the organisations
surveyed did not have procedures to enable data subjects
to exercise their rights. Additionally, 39% indicated they
collect performance data, but did not understand that
this is classified as special category data. Other recurring
issues included the absence of retention schedules, limited
understanding of special category (particularly health) data,
and insufficient training on data protection responsibilities.
The DPC’s next steps will include outreach to governing
and bodies and sports organisations to assist with the
development of tailored guidance for both clubs and
members of the public. As part of this process, we will be
conducting a wider stakeholder engagement taking in the
sports’ governing bodies, representative associations, and
government agencies to work collaboratively to develop
useful tools for data protection compliance in the sector.

Over 40%

of respondents reported not having any
formal data protection policies in place

SUPERVISION

PAGE 79

Medical Centre Patient Records

Adult Safeguarding Guidance

In 2024, the DPC engaged with two general practitioner (GP)
clinics to assist in resolving a dispute over the management
of patient records. The issue arose when a GP departed
their original practice to start a new clinic and requested
the transfer of their patients’ records. However, the original
practice was reluctant to release these records in the
absence of the consent of the patients in question. The
confusion arose from a misunderstanding about who was
considered to be a data controller of the patient data,
complicating the decision on how to manage patient records
when a GP departs from a practice.

The DPC has identified as a strategic goal the prioritisation
of the protection of children and other vulnerable groups,
in the DPC’s Regulatory Strategy 2022-2027. As part of this
commitment, the DPC has engaged with stakeholders groups
in this sector in identifying data protection concerns arising in
the context of adult safeguarding.

To address this situation, the DPC organised a meeting with
the GP practice to provide guidance and clarity. The DPC
explained the different roles involved in managing patient
data, including the roles of data controllers, joint controllers,
and data processors. The DPC also stressed the importance
of having clear agreements in place when multiple parties
are responsible for the same data. The DPC recommended
establishing formal joint controller agreements that clearly
defined each GP’s roles, responsibilities, and liability regarding
patient data management. For GP departures, the DPC
advised implementing a structured departure protocol where
both practices would document which patient records would
be transferred, establish secure transfer methods, and
maintain comprehensive audit trails. The original practice
subsequently created standardised procedures requiring
departing GPs to provide advance notice, complete handover
documentation, and participate in a transition meeting
where record access arrangements would be formalized
in writing before any transfer occurred. The DPC further
advised implementing a transparent communication protocol
requiring practices to promptly notify patients when their GP
was departing. This included sending practice letters detailing
the GP’s new location, timeline for transition, and how
continuity of care would be maintained
The DPC’s advice helped the GPs understand their
responsibilities under data protection law and highlighted
the need for well-defined policies to handle situations like
this in the future.
This case highlights the importance of having robust
data governance structures in healthcare settings. By
engaging with the practice and offering the DPC’s expertise,
the DPC was able to resolve the confusion and ensure that
patient data was handled appropriately. It was important for
the DPC to assist in facilitating a timely solution to avoid any
adverse patient outcomes due to a lack of access to data.
This engagement not only solved the immediate problem
but also reinforced the broader need for clear guidelines
and procedures in medical practices to manage patient
data effectively and in compliance with legal requirements.
The DPC planned to engage with stakeholders including
representative bodies of healthcare practitioners and the
Department of Health on these matters in 2025.

In 2024, the DPC developed a guidance document on the
issues arising in data sharing in adult safeguarding, illustrating
the practical day-to-day issues experienced by practitioners
for publication in 2025. This guidance seeks to provide clarity
around the considerations and analyses that must be born in
mind when processing data in the adult safeguarding context.
The guidance is part of a planned range of actions including
the publication of FAQs for both practitioners and members
of the public on specific issues, such as the interaction
between GDPR and the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity)
Act 2015.
The DPC also contributed to the Law Reform Commission’s
report on a Regulatory Framework for Adult Safeguarding,
and participated in the launch of this valuable document
in April 2024, along with other regulatory colleagues
and stakeholders. The DPC welcomes the Law Reform
Commission’s recommendation of the introduction of a
statutory and regulatory framework for adult safeguarding,
which would entail comprehensive, cross-sectoral legislation.
In the existing regulatory landscape, the DPC remains
committed to assisting those working in the complex field of
adult safeguarding in understanding and meeting their data
protection compliance obligations.
As part of this wider stakeholder engagement, the DPC
also delivered a presentation to Designated Officers of the
HSE’s National Safeguarding Office responsible for adult
safeguarding, focusing on data sharing and data protection
best practices. The presentation provided a valuable
opportunity to support Designated Officers in their daily
operations and offer reassurance on best practices in data
protection, particularly in the context of data sharing. The
DPC planned to deliver more presentations and webinars to
similar groups in 2025, which will assist in providing clarity
and certainty regarding their data protection obligations, in
particular when dealing with sensitive situations.

PAGE 80

English Language College Biometric Processing
In January 2024, the DPC responded to a concern raised by
the Irish Council for Civil Liberties in relation to the alleged
processing of personal data by way of fingerprint and/or
facial recognition data for the operation of a biometric system
clock-in system and mobile app by an adult education college.
The purpose of the clock-in system was to scan students’
fingerprints and faces for the purpose of tracking their
attendance at classes. The DPC further noted that this app
was allegedly used to record sick leave and students were
required to submit medical certificates on it.
The DPC engaged with the college to understand the
mechanics of the data processing, and to query the legal
basis and terms and conditions of its use. While the DPC
established that the college was lawfully relying on explicit
consent from students for biometric processing, the
consent form and the Terms and Conditions were not fully
transparent in ensuring that the withdrawal of consent would
be possible, nor that there were alternative methods for
clocking in.

Arising from this positive engagement, the data
controller implemented the changes highlighted by
the DPC and issued an email to all students informing
them of the alternative methods of clocking in and
how to withdraw consent for the use of their biometric
data. This engagement also highlights the need for
data controllers to fully interrogate the data protection
implications of introducing biometric processing
solutions, which may appear to be simple and costeffective but can represent a highly intrusive form of
processing of special category personal data.

SUPERVISION

Innovation and Public Service Transformation
Strategy
During the course of 2024, the DPC has been consulted
by and engaged with several Government Departments
and public bodies on the data protection implications of
the digitalisation of their services. These projects include
the Digital Wallet & Life Events Programme, Online SAFE
Registration, the HSE App, and the CSO Digital First
Census pilot.
Each of these projects aims to make public services more
accessible and available to citizens, delivering greater
effectiveness and efficiency. The DPC welcomes the
opportunity to engage on these initiatives in order to assist in
the implementation of data protection by design, along with
the full consideration of the safeguards that are necessary to
protect people’s personal data when they choose to engage
with public services online.
In 2025, the DPC will continue to work with public bodies to
ensure that data protection and privacy considerations are at
the heart of Ireland’s Public Service ICT strategy.

Compliance Sweep of Supermarket and
Convenience Store Sector
In accordance Articles 57 and 58 of the GDPR, which focuses
on raising awareness among controllers and processors
about their data protection obligations, the DPC carried out
a GDPR compliance questionnaire on the Irish Retail Sector
in 2024.
The project entailed conducting a fact-finding exercise with
the largest retailers in the sector in Ireland with the objective
of generating deeper insights into the data processing
and compliance levels of data protection among Ireland’s
largest supermarket and convenience store retailers,
which have a considerable footprint on data processing in
Ireland5. Areas of focus included Article 30 of the GDPR,
Records of Processing Activities (RoPAs), Article 12 of the
GDPR transparency obligations as well as identifying any
emerging or problematic data processing issues. The DPC
is currently reviewing the responses to the questionnaires
and it intended on engaging one to one with Controllers and
following up on the issues identified from this sweep in 2025.

The targeted organisations combined had over 90% market share
in the sector
5

SUPERVISION

Road Collision Data
The DPC concluded its consultation with the Department of
Transport (DoT) regarding a review of the legislative basis for
the receipt from An Garda Síochána (AGS) and the onward
sharing of road traffic collision data by the Road Safety
Authority (RSA) to local authorities and the National Transport
Authority (NTA). This culminated with a new Ministerial
Direction, pursuant to section 8(1) of the Road Safety
Authority Act 2006, permitting the sharing of collision data
to the RSA from AGS and an agreed approach to ensure the
onward sharing of data to entities such as local authorities.
Throughout the consultation process, the DPC emphasised
that the GDPR should not prevent the proportionate
publication of crash location details, particularly where any
personal data element is largely anonymised and /or limited
to the data necessary to achieve the desired policy objective.
The DoT led the engagement between all stakeholders on
examining the specific data fields involved resulting in the
identification of a set of data points which met necessity
and proportionality requirements. A Data Protection
Impact Assessment (DPIA) was also conducted ensuring
all risks associated with data sharing were identified and
appropriately mitigated.
It is acknowledged that data sharing amongst a number of
stakeholders can be a complex task. However, the GDPR
provides a clear framework for all stakeholders to consider
their data protection obligations. Consideration of the GDPR
and implementation of a privacy design approach at the
beginning of a project facilitates robust and sustainable data
sharing arrangements. It requires organisations to carefully
think through its objectives and what is required to achieve
those objectives in a manner which involves the least impact
upon the data protection rights of individuals. This is the
important principle of data protection by design and by
default set out in Article 25 GDPR.

PAGE 81

Data protection by design and by default provides
two critical concepts for future project planning. Data
protection by design entails embedding data privacy
features and data privacy enhancing technologies
directly into the design of a system, product, service
or process and then throughout the lifecycle. Data
protection by default means that user service settings
must be automatically data protection friendly, and that
only data which is necessary for each specific purpose of
the processing should be gathered at all.

Whilst the DPC has published specific guidelines for data
sharing in the public sector QR 1, it is important that
stakeholders engage with the DPC at an early stage and
that appropriate timelines in respect of the delivery of a
project are implemented.  Holding workshops and having a
project lead, as in this case, were important steps in ensuring
a full and detailed assessment could be conducted which
ultimately helped facilitate a satisfactory outcome for all
stakeholders.

Data Sharing in the Public Sector r

QR 1

PAGE 82

Radio Teilifís Éireann (RTÉ)
RTÉ voluntarily consulted with the DPC regarding a Data
Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) it had conducted in
relation to the creation of an internal register of interests and
an external register of activities for its staff and contractors.
Certain RTÉ staff and external contractors under contract
with RTÉ have a duty to declare any conflicts of interests
regarding external activities. However, the proposal, whilst
improving governance around such declarations and
approvals, also entailed the publication of a register of
external activities on RTÉ’s website. It was proposed that this
online register would include name, description of external
activity and remuneration (set out in bands) to be published
online on a quarterly basis.
During the consultation, the DPC raised a number of
issues with RTÉ, particularly in relation to the necessity and
proportionality of creating an online register of external
activities and the identification of an appropriate legal basis to
underpin the processing proposed i.e. online publication of
personal information on a quarterly basis relating to external
activities carried out by RTÉ personnel in their private capacity.
Whilst RTÉ initially sought to rely upon the legitimate interest
lawful ground under Article 6(1)(f) GDPR to publish such
details, RTÉ agreed that it would underpin the processing via
legislation. However, RTÉ were initially of the view that existing
legislation could permit the processing of personal data for
an internal register of interests and for an online external
register of activities.
Whilst the DPC did not at this time have an issue with RTÉ’s
position regarding the processing of personal data for an
internal register, it disagreed with its view regarding an
external register of activities. In noting the generic nature
of the legislation being proposed to underpin the proposal
(i.e. the Broadcasting Act 2009), the lack of clarity, precision
and foreseeability in its application to persons subject to
it and the serious interference entailed, in line with recent
jurisprudence of the Court of Justice, the DPC strongly
recommended RTE to consider seeking an additional
legislative mechanism to underpin the processing to publish
an external register.

SUPERVISION

RTÉ responded positively to the DPC’s recommendation and
agreed not to publish the personal information as proposed
in the absence of such a mechanism. Rather, RTÉ paired
back its proposal regarding online publication and currently
publishes quarterly reports in an anonymised format.
If bodies intend to publish personal details of individuals
online it is important to understand that processing of
this nature entails a significant and serious interference
with the fundamental rights to privacy and protection
of personal data. As such, the bar to be met is very high,
requiring a controller to demonstrate that the processing is
justified and that an adequate and robust legal basis exists
which is clear, precise and foreseeable to the persons who
are subject to it.

Use of CCTV in restrooms
Throughout 2023, the DPC received numerous queries and
complaints from individuals about organisations’ use of CCTV
in restrooms or areas where a high expectation of privacy
exists (see Annual Report 2023).
The DPC engaged with these organisations on a one-to-one
basis and also updated its guidance on the use of CCTV by
data controllers to include a specific section on “The use of
CCTV in areas of an increased expectation of privacy”. QR 2
This was aimed at clarifying the position of the use of CCTV
in areas where individuals have a heightened expectation of
privacy. In addition, the DPC contacted the relevant industry
bodies to inform them of the update with the
DPC’s guidelines.
As a consequence of this guidance, in 2024 the DPC noted
a considerable reduction in concerns raised by the public
about CCTV in restrooms or areas where a high expectation
of privacy exists.
The DPC intended to engage with small and medium sized
enterprises throughout 2025 on similar issues to deliver
clear and practical guidelines to assist these organisations in
meeting their compliance responsibilities in a proportionate
and balanced manner.
QR 2

SUPERVISION

Technology companies sharing personal data with
law enforcement agencies.
In 2023, the DPC contacted several technology organisations
in relation to how they share personal data with law
enforcement and requested detail on the processes and
policies that they have in place when doing so (see Annual
Report 2023).
The DPC examined issues such as the process which
controllers use to authenticate requests for user data from
law enforcement agencies, how they determine the validity
of emergency requests for user data so as to respect the
principle of data minimisation when responding to requests
for user data. Also examined was the internal guidance and/
or workflows that is available to the controller’s staff who
process such requests from law enforcement agencies.
For those controllers whose policies were not considered to
be sufficiently developed, recommendations were provided
on further action that could be taken in this regard including
detail on useful practices that would assist with eliminating
any gaps in terms of data protection6.

Recommendations were provided on a number of matters such as:
Determining the validity of emergency requests - to provide controller
personnel with clearer guidance on how to verify the authenticity of
an emergency request;
•
Improving workflows and personnel guidance; and
•
Processes for authenticating requests for data from law enforcement.
6

•

PAGE 83

Whilst this project has now concluded, for those organisations
where the DPC identified room for improvement, they were
expected to revert to the DPC during 2024 with detailed
feedback on how they addressed the recommendations.
Some responses are listed below:
Controller A – Has advised that they have updated policies
consistent with the DPC’s guidance. They further stated that
the DPC’s “good practice” observations on the importance
of detailed documented guidance for staff handling nonemergency law enforcement requests was accepted,
and they have consolidated and updated such guidance
accordingly and will continue to ensure that their staff have
access to appropriate resources tailored to address the types
of requests the company receives.
Controller B – Has stated that they have implemented
enhancements in line with the recommendations from
the DPC to these four categories: (1) Authentication of Law
Enforcement Requests (2) Emergency Requests (3) Voluntary
(Non-Emergency) Disclosures (4) Audits.
Controller C – Has stated that they have initiated a variety
of substantive changes to their lawful access policies
and procedures, including to areas such as Emergency
Disclosure Requests, Internal Staff Guidance and Workflows,
Authentication of Law Enforcement Portal Accounts, Human
Review and the Scope of Data Requests.

PAGE 84

SUPERVISION

Commissioner for Data Protection and Chairperson of the DPC, Dr Des Hogan participated in the Future of Privacy Forum panel “Two (too?) Hard Questions for
Data Protection and Generative AI” in October. Left to Right: Bianca-Ioana M. (Deputy Director for Global Privacy at the Future of Privacy Forum), Dr. Gabriela
Zanfir-Fortuna (Vice President for Global Privacy at the Future of Privacy Forum), Dr. Miriam Wimmer (Director at the Brazilian Data Protection Authority,
ANPD), Judge Bertrand du Marais (Commissioner for Commission Nationale de l’Informatique et des Libertés, CNIL), Dr Des Hogan (Commissioner for Data
Protection and Chairperson of the DPC), Haksoo Ko (Chair of the Personal Information Protection Commission Korea, PIPC), Jules Polonetsky (CEO of the
Future of Privacy Forum), and David Weinkauf, PhD (Senior IT Research Analyst at the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada, OPC).

Riot Games – Riot Voice Evaluation

Meta Parental Supervision

In June 2024, Riot Games - an Article 27 GDPR controller - (a
controller not established in the European Union) informed
the DPC of its intent to launch Riot Voice Evaluation (RVE)
for the game VALORANT in the EU/ EEA. Riot Games already
offered live voice communication features for VALORANT in
the EEA, and RVE would add recording capabilities to allow
Riot to evaluate voice communications to identify harmful
online behaviours by players and allow Riot to address
violations of their Terms of Service. Initially, RVE would be
triggered where a player was reported for bad behaviour
on voice communication channels. Riot Games intended to
progress to using an AI to assess the voice communications
to identify and address infringements and would use the
snippets of voice communications to improve the AI model.
The DPC wrote to Riot with recommendations to increase the
transparency to players on RVE and on Riot’s proposed use
of AI. The DPC recommended that Riot create a transparent,
easy-to-use way for players to object to the processing prior
to the rollout of RVE.

The DPC engaged with Meta Platforms Ireland Limited (Meta)
on a new parental supervision facility on Meta platforms such
as Instagram, Facebook and Quest. The Supervision feature
is an optional tool for parents and children, the purpose of
which Meta states is to enhance online safety by affording
parents with greater control and oversight of their preteen’s activity in order to provide them with a safe and age
appropriate experience across various Meta platforms.

On retention periods, the documentation outlined various
timelines from 24 hours to 2 years of retention for various
aspects of the RVE collection and processing that was not
reflected in the Privacy Notice. The DPC considered that it
was not possible for players to identify such periods with
any certainty from the information provided in the Privacy
Notice. The DPC therefore recommended that clear retention
periods or criteria to determine such periods be developed
and communicated to players clearly prior to launch.
In response, Riot made significant changes to their rollout
plans, enhancing transparency information to be provided
to players, as well as the development of an opt out process.
Riot stated that there will be no LLM (Large Language Model)
training based on EU/ EEA user data in the initial launch.

The DPC recognises the need to find a balance between
providing children with reasonable autonomy and ensuring
effective parental supervision online. On assessing the tool
the DPC made several recommendations to Meta, including
considerations for inclusion of a notice on the child user
information page outlining possible abuses of the parental
supervision facility by non-parents and supporting a link
to related support services for the child user to access. In
order to provide adequate transparency to all users, the DPC
recommended Meta re-evaluate the information it provided
to users to ensure clear indications of what personal data of
third parties is shared in order that both the child and third
parties clearly understand who has access to that
personal data.
In November 2024, Meta advised that it had considered
the DPC’s views and had implemented various changes as
a result, including updating its Help Centre articles and the
language in its Privacy Policy.

SUPERVISION

Data Protection Assessment of 3rd Party
Developer Access to Personal Data
The DPC completed a data protection assessment of thirdparty developer access to personal data. The assessment
was primarily concerned with access to personal data held
by Meta that is provided to third-parties as part of App
developing for various Meta platforms. The Assessment
reviewed the extent to which Meta had implemented
appropriate technical and organisational measures under
Article 25 GDPR to be able to demonstrate that processing is
performed in accordance with the GDPR.
In February 2024, the DPC issued recommendations that
focused on:
•
the initial assessment of developers and developer’s
apps to include developer identification, developer
verification, vetting and app review;7
•
user access, permissions and end of access;
•
monitoring data access and data use;
•
oversight by Meta of the data access framework; and
•
security.
At year’s end Meta had informed that DPC that it was
assessing the recommendations.

X Grok
In July 2023, the DPC was informed that Twitter International
Unlimited Company (Twitter) was working with x.AI Corp to
develop a generative AI-powered tool to enhance search
on the X platform. This developed into the generative AI
application known as “Grok”. In December 2023, Twitter
provided the DPC with a Data Protection Impact Assessment
and a Legitimate Impact Assessment to support its proposal
to build future versions of Grok that would be trained on X
user data.

PAGE 85

In July 2024, the DPC became aware that the mitigations
Twitter had identified had not been completed prior to
Twitter beginning to process X user data for training Grok.
The DPC immediately asked Twitter to cease the processing,
however Twitter declined.
The DPC formed the view that without the mitigations in
place, and without a voluntary pause of the processing by
the controller, there existed a real risk to the rights and
freedoms of data subjects in the EU/ EEA and that there was
an urgent need for the DPC, as Lead Supervisory Authority,
to act to protect data subjects. To prevent such risks
materialising, the DPC made an application to Judge Leonie
Reynolds in the High Court under section 134 of the Data
Protection Act 2018 on 8 August 2024, the first time such an
application had been made8.
During the High Court proceedings, Twitter undertook to
cease processing any EU/EEA X user data that had been
collected during the period when the mitigations were not
in place. Further, Twitter subsequently deleted the datasets
that included that data so no further use could be made of
them. In early September 2024, based on Twitter deleting the
dataset and agreeing to make the undertaking permanent,
the parties agreed to withdraw the proceedings from
the Court.
During the relevant period, the DPC continued to receive
complaints from EU/ EEA data subjects relating to the
data processing at issue which fell to be considered under
standard complaint handling procedures.

Through a lengthy engagement, the DPC highlighted issues
with the Twitter documentation and implementation of Grok,
including:
•
Transparency to users;
•
Potential use of special category data
As part of the engagement and the documents the DPC
reviewed, Twitter had established certain mitigations that
should be in place prior to processing, particularly around
transparency and providing users with the ability to opt out of
their data being utilised to train Grok and other AI.

Section 134 of the Data Protection Act 2018 allows the DPC, where it
considers there is an urgent need to act to protect the rights and freedoms
of data subjects, to make an application to the High Court for an order
requiring the data controller to suspend, restrict or prohibit the processing
of personal data.
8

For example, the DPC recommended Meta to carry out a re-evaluation of
its current processes to identify Developers in order to ensure all Developers
who are provided access to its platform have been adequately risk assessed.
7

PAGE 86

Meta AI
In March 2024, Meta Platforms Ireland Limited (Meta)
informed the DPC that it would be relying on legitimate
interest under Article 6(1)(f) of the GDPR for training AI
models with user personal data. After the DPC highlighted
several concerns, Meta made changes to its roll out including:
•
Users would be directly notified by Meta  of the
proposed change;
•
Additional transparency measures would be added,
including dedicated generative AI resources;
•
Information on user’s rights to object and a practical
way for users to do so;
•
Users would be provided at least 4 weeks before the
training would begin to allow them to object.
In May 2024, Meta announced an update to its Privacy
Policy with changes that would give effect to this. Almost
immediately, the DPC began receiving reports of technical
issues with the notification and objection form outlining,
amongst other things, that:
•
Users in some jurisdictions could not access the
objection form;
•
Users were unable to object in the mobile application;
and
•
Users who were able to successfully complete the
objection form were not always told the status of their
objection or were provided an error message after
completing the process.
The combination of these issues led to intensive engagement
between the DPC and Meta, and in June 2024, the DPC
requested that Meta pause the training of AI using EU/EEA
user personal data to provide time for the DPC and the DPC’s
peers, the European Supervisory Authorities, to evaluate
the use of legitimate interest as a correct legal basis for the
proposed AI training9. Meta agreed to voluntarily pause the
processing, resulting in no EU/EEA user data being used for AI
training9. The DPC welcomed the decision by Meta to pause
its plans to train its large language model using public content
shared by adults on Facebook and Instagram across the EU/
EEA. The engagement with Meta was ongoing at year’s end.

During this period the DPC collaborated extensively with its EU counterparts,
initiating several rapid response meetings in order to keep all authorities
appraised of the latest information and the actions that the DPC was
undertaking.
9

SUPERVISION

SUPERVISION

PAGE 87

AI OPINION
As part of its ongoing review of various proposed AI models being
developed by organisations during 2024, the DPC considered that the
underlying fundamental issues relating to the personal data processing that
takes place in the training and operation of AI models were issues similarly
faced by Supervisory Authorities across all Member States of the EU/EEA.
In early 2024, there was no established consensus on matters
central to the training and operation of AI Models specifically.
Fundamental questions included whether personal data used
to train AI models remained personal data in the AI model
or in future iterations of the model, along with questions as
to how GDPR rights could be exercised by data subjects. The
DPC, with its peer regulators, wished to achieve regulatory
harmonisation across the EU/ EEA. Given the strategic
importance of reaching regulatory consensus in this area, the
DPC considered it both necessary and appropriate to refer a
set of questions to the EDPB, under the statutory scheme set
out under Article 64(2) of the GDPR in September 2024. The
aim of the formal referral, the first undertaken by the DPC,
was to achieve DPA harmonisation within a number of weeks.
The questions referred to the EDPB related largely to the
determination of whether, and under what circumstances,
data processed in the context of AI Models would be
considered personal data. Other questions related to the
suitability of Art 6(1)(f) (legitimate interests) as a legal basis
for the processing. The formulation of the request and
associated contributions to the development of the Opinion
was a cross-functional effort within both the DPC and all
Supervisory Authorities, with staff of various technical,
legal and administrative roles involved through the EDPB’s
Technology and Key Provisions subgroups, as well as the
Strategic Advisory subgroup of the EDPB engaged. The entire
process, including a public consultation with industry and
stakeholders was project managed by the EDPB Secretariat.
A formal Opinion was adopted by the EDPB with the statutory
14 week period, in late December 2024.

The DPC expressed its gratitude to its peer Supervisory
Authorities across the EU/ EEA for assigning significant
resources to the deliberative processes and to the EDPB
Chair and Secretariat for their stewardship of the Opinion.
The clarity provided by the Opinion allowed the DPC to write
to several controllers for whom it is the Lead Supervisory
Authority in December 2024, drawing the opinion to their
attention. This communication also reiterated certain GDPR
requirements not covered by the Opinion, which must equally
be addressed in the assessments required to ensure the
lawful processing of personal data in an AI context, including
Special Category Data and purpose processing under Article
6(4) of the GDPR.
The DPC indicated its willingness to meet with controllers
to discuss the opinion and the development of AI
Models, as well as their data protection assessments and
implementation plans prior to launch in early 2025. The
Opinion would be of assistance in providing direction
on the information, assessments and documentation
data controllers need to demonstrate compliance and
accountability when developing AI models and bringing
them to market.

PAGE 88

Inter-Regulatory Affairs
The European Union’s new digital legislative package
(including the Data Governance Act, Digital Services Act,
Digital Markets Act, Data Act, and the Artificial Intelligence
Act) has led to the implementation of a broad range of new
regulatory obligations and structures at national and EU
level. Personal data is central to the digital economy and EU
data protection law is often considered to be a cornerstone
of digital regulation. The continued reliance on personal
data in today’s economy also represents the need to protect
fundamental rights, especially with the advancement and
increased use of AI.

SUPERVISION

An important part of this new function involves engagement
with Ireland’s Digital Regulators Group (comprising of the
DPC, the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission,
the Commission for Communications Regulation and An
Coimisiún na Meán) in order to identify those inter-regulatory
touch points across the DPC’s respective remits and
functions, and areas in which cooperation mechanisms may
need to be established.
Inter-regulatory engagement will be a priority area for the
DPC in 2025, during which time we will seek to establish new,
and strengthen existing, relationships with co-regulators in
Ireland and beyond.

In addition to the provisions that explicitly reference data
protection authorities each new Act in what is termed “the
EU digital rulebook” is stated to be without prejudice to the
GDPR, meaning that when the relevant competent authorities
under those Acts are addressing matters pertaining to
personal data, cooperation with the DPC will be necessary,
whether at European Commission, EU or national
regulator level.
While the DPC may not be the competent supervisory
authority across all Acts, it will nonetheless have a very
prominent role in providing data protection expertise and
guidance to other regulators at national and EU level in the
performance of their functions. As such, inter-regulatory
cooperation will be essential to ensuring coherence among
separate but interacting areas of regulation.

In response to these challenges, the DPC established a
new function in 2024 with the creation of a “Head of InterRegulatory Affairs” post at Deputy Commissioner level. This
new function will serve as the main operational linkage with
outside agencies and will be the dedicated point of contact
for other authorities to coordinate cooperation tasks.

In September 2024, Commissioner for Data Protection Des Hogan spoke
on a panel for “Ethical considerations in AI development – Privacy and
consumer protection implications” at the Forum for EU-US Legal-Economics
Affairs, Paris. Back (L-R) CNIL Commissioner & Conseiller d’Etat Bertrand Du
Marais, EDPS Dr. Wojciech Wiewiorowski, and ARCOM Supervision of Online
Platforms Working Group President Benoit Loutrel Front (L-R) Commissioner
Des Hogan, CJEU Justice Lucia Serena Rossi, Recent European Court of
Human Rights President Robert Ragnar Spano.

7

Children’s Data
Protection Rights

PAGE 89

PAGE 90

CHILDREN’S DATA PROTECTION RIGHTS

Children’s Data Protection Rights
Children’s Policy
Data Protection Toolkit for Schools

In the course of its supervision and engagement activities in 2023
(see Annual Report 2023), the DPC identified a number of areas, which
schools, as a sector, appeared to find challenging from a data protection
compliance perspective. Subsequently, the DPC commenced a process
of stakeholder engagement to discuss data protection concerns arising
in the context of schools. The DPC met with a number of bodies and
organisations in the education sector, including the Joint Managerial
Board (JMB), the Professional Development Services for Teachers
(Formerly PDST now OIDE) and the Limerick and Clare Education and
Training Board (LCETB), in order to gain a clear picture of the specific
areas, which the sector considers merit particular attention in terms of
guidance. Issues such as managing subject access requests (SARs) under
Article 15 of the GDPR, the exercise of children’s rights and the role of
parents, and data sharing with other bodies were among the topics of
concern raised by stakeholders.
On foot of this engagement, in December 2024 the
DPC published a new “Data Protection Toolkit for Schools”
resource, Toolkit for Schools QR 1 which includes a detailed
guidance document, a sample Data Protection Impact
Assessment (DPIA) template, a checklist for responding
to SARs, tips on what to include in a privacy policy, and a
“Frequently Asked Questions” section, all of which are tailored

toa the needs of schools as data controllers. The DPC
hopes this resource will further assist schools and the wider
education sector in meeting their data protection obligations.
QR 1

CHILDREN’S DATA PROTECTION RIGHTS

PAGE 91

Guidance

Data Protection Webinar for Irish Play
Therapy Community Association

Safer Internet Day 2024 –
“Managing my digital footprint”
Protecting children’s personal data is one of the five strategic
goals of the DPC’s 2022-2027 Regulatory Strategy QR 2. To
celebrate and raise awareness for Safer Internet Day 2024,
the DPC produced a blogpost QR 3 and collaborated with
WebWise (Ireland’s Safer Internet Centre) to produce an
infographic QR 4 to educate young people on how to manage
their “digital footprint” online. The aim of this initiative was to
highlight to teens that, as we navigate the online world, we
all leave traces of information behind us which, when
pieced together, form an overall jigsaw or profile of our
online activity.
Through this blog and infographic, young people were
encouraged to pause and reflect on the amount of
information they are sharing online, and to consider
some of the ways they can reduce their digital footprint
by following the DPC’s five top tips.

QR 2

QR 3

QR 4

In June 2024, the DPC met with the Irish Play Therapy
Community Association (IPTCA), a non-profit association
for Play Therapists based in Ireland, who were seeking
guidance on a number of data protection challenges that
their members are experiencing. Issues such as managing
subject access requests (SARs), the exercise of children’s
rights and the role of parents, data retention, and data
sharing with other bodies were among the topics of concern
raised by stakeholders.
On foot of this engagement, in October the DPC delivered a
two-hour webinar which specifically addressed these issues
to approximately 100 registered attendees. The webinar was
structured thematically with a dedicated Q&A session after
each topic, allowing participants to ask questions and share
experiences, and receive answers to their queries in real time.
In order to provide further support, the DPC compiled
a comprehensive document based on the questions
raised during the webinar, which was circulated amongst
all attendees afterwards. The feedback received was
very positive, with requests for further sessions to be
delivered in 2025.

PAGE 92

External engagements
A spotlight on the protection of children online and age
assurance
In order to keep abreast with the latest developments and
trends in the field of children’s data protection, the DPC
spoke at numerous external events over the course of 2024.
This included panel discussions on safeguarding children
and teens online (Google’s “Growing Up in the Digital Age
Summit”), how to strike the right balance privacy and safety
for children (hosted by RAID (Regulation of AI, Internet and
Data)), and age assurance in an inter-regulatory landscape
hosted by the Law Society of Ireland.
The DPC also attended and participated in the Global
Age Assurance Standards Summit in Manchester, a 5-day
conference dedicated to the issue of age assurance. This firstof-its-kind event was attended by over 700 stakeholders, from
regulators, international organisations, civil society, academia,
industry, age assurance service providers, standards
developers and technical experts. The DPC participated in a
panel discussion entitled “Accessible Age Assurance: Building

CHILDREN’S DATA PROTECTION RIGHTS

Transparency Into Age Assurance Solutions”, and separately
delivered a workshop on how the DPC has approached
its “Fundamentals for a Child-Oriented Approach to Data
Processing” guidance and the impact and implications that
this has for age assurance.
The DPC also recorded an episode for the “Fighting dark
patterns – Regain your free will online” podcast series led by
Fair Patterns, where the conversation focused on the current
legal landscape for children’s data protection rights in the EU,
the particular dangers that “dark patterns” pose to children
and the importance of transparency and education to
empower children online.
The DPC also continued to participate as a member of a
number of external working groups focused on children’s
data protection issues, including the ICO’s International Age
Assurance Working Group. In addition, as an active member
of the Global Privacy Assembly’s Digital Education Working
Group, the DPC contributed to various surveys and initiatives
carried out by the group on topics such as digital literacy for
parents during the year.

CHILDREN’S DATA PROTECTION RIGHTS

Engagement with statutory bodies
Throughout the course of 2024, the DPC met with several
statutory bodies to discuss developments in the area of
children’s data protection issues, including the Office of the
Australian Information Commissioner and Ireland’s Coimisiún
na Meán. The DPC also held meetings with its UK and French
counterparts, the Commission nationale de l’informatique
et des libertés (CNIL) and the Information Commissioner’s
Office (ICO), throughout 2024 to exchange views and discuss
the latest developments in both DPA’s work on children’s
data protection rights. In late 2024, the DPC paid a visit to its
colleagues at the CNIL in their offices in Paris to concretise
plans for a joint initiative between both DPAs in 2025 on
the topic of “sharenting”, the habitual sharing by parents of
information online relating to their children such as photos,
videos, information and private moments.

Codes of Conduct
The DPC continued to engage with Technology Ireland
throughout 2024 on their “European Youth Online Data
Protection Code of Conduct”. This Code was motivated by
the publication of the DPC’s “Fundamentals for a ChildOriented Approach to Data Processing”, and is intended
to focus on certain topics of the GDPR that are deemed
particularly important to drive higher standards of
protection for children’s personal data online.

PAGE 93

Work on children’s issues within the
European Data Protection Board
Statement on Age Assurance
The DPC’s focus and dedication to the complex issue of age
assurance in the digital environment also continued at an EU
level throughout 2024. In March 2024, the DPC joined the
drafting team for a statement being prepared by the EDPB
on general data protection principles and criteria for age
assurance systems. The statement, expected to be adopted
in early 2025, would list ten principles for the compliant
processing of personal data when determining the age or
age range of an individual. The DPC is proud to have been
involved in driving a consistent approach to age assurance
across Europe, one which protects children’s wellbeing, while
also complying with data protection principles.
Guidelines on children’s issues
The DPC has been continuing its role as co-rapporteur in
the preparation at EDPB level of guidance on children’s data
protection issues alongside a team of co-rapporteurs from
Germany, France, Greece and Denmark. The purpose of
these guidelines is to seek to achieve a harmonised approach
at EU level in relation to the critical area of the processing of
children’s data.

8
PAGE 94

Data Protection
Officers

DATA PROTECTION OFFICERS

PAGE 95

Data Protection Officers
The role played by organisational Data Protection Officers (DPOs) is critical
for the successful application of data protection law. Under Articles 3739 GDPR, DPOs play an important role in assisting their organisations
in meeting their data protection compliance obligations by advising and
informing colleagues and management, and monitoring adherence to
policies and procedures. In order to carry out their tasks in an effective
manner, DPOs must be fully supported by their employer and allowed to
act independently within the organisation, as legislation requires.
Active support of the DPO by management includes providing
sufficient financial resources, infrastructure, and staff as
may be required. DPOs must also be given sufficient time
to carry out their tasks, in particular where the DPO may
be required to carry out duties additional to their Data
Protection responsibilities. A well-resourced DPO team has
been demonstrated to be of great benefit to organisations in
all sectors in building a culture of data protection awareness,
which in turn drives compliance and reduces the risk of data
breaches or other incidents occurring.

It is important to note that where a DPO has been appointed,
the organisation as a data controller is obliged to support
them in performing their tasks, and that failure to do so
infringes the GDPR (Article 39.2). As the main point of contact
within their organisation for the DPC, DPOs are an important
stakeholder for the DPC and during 2024, the DPC continued
to support DPOs and assist them in being more impactful in
carrying out their roles.

PAGE 96

DATA PROTECTION OFFICERS

The DPC participated in the 2023 Coordinated
Enforcement Framework (CEF) Topic “The Designation
and Position of Data Protection Officers” with the aims of:
•
•
•

Helping to identify emerging issues;
assessing the knowledge, expertise and impact of the
DPOs; and
generating deeper insights into the role at an EU level.

The DPC found three substantive issues:
•
The Resources of the Data Protection Officer - 33%
of respondents felt they did not have sufficient
resources to fulfil the role of a DPO)
•
Conflicts of Interests - 36% of respondents indicating
that had additional tasks to those relating to Data
protection with a substantial number pointing to tasks
which did not complement the role of DPO.
•
Experience - 80% of DPOs replied they have at least
3+ years of experience working on the application and
the interpretation of data protection requirements.

be notified of the formal designation of a DPO by an
organisation. As of the end of the 2024 the DPC has been
notified of the designation of 3,932 DPO’s broken down
by sector as follows:

Notiﬁcation of Data
Protection Oﬃcers
Not-for-proﬁt Sector
246

Public Sector
366

Further details on this report can be found on the
EDPB website: Coordinated Enforcement Framework QR 1

QR 1

As part of the requirements of GDPR, the DPC must

Private Sector
3,320

DATA PROTECTION OFFICERS

PAGE 97

From left to right – Online Safety Commissioner Niamh Hodnett and Deputy Commissioner Jenny Dolan at the DPO Conference, November 2024

DPO Supports
The development of sector-based DPO networks has been
a positive feature of the implementation of GDPR in Ireland
since 2018, and engagement with these groups has proven
to be a valuable resource for the DPC in terms of stakeholder
engagement. DPO networks provide an opportunity for
colleagues to share information and practical solutions
to issues arising in data protection compliance. They also
connect DPOs to a wider professional network and contribute
to building up the data protection and privacy community.
In 2024, the DPC continued to engage with established DPO
networks, and made connections with new and developing
networks, across different sectors which included the
following:
•

The DPC participated in a conference organised by the
Health Research Data Protection Network, on issues
arising in the application of GDPR to health research
and clinical trials.

•

•

•

The DPC contributed to a training course for DPOs in
the public sector, developed by the Institute for Public
Administration in collaboration with the Civil Service
DPO Network for the second year running.
The DPC engaged with the International
Pharmaceutical & Medical Device Privacy Consortium,
discussing issues arising in the application of GDPR by
the Med Tech sector in Ireland and internationally.
The DPC participated in the annual conference of the
Association of Data Protection Officers (ADPO).

In 2025, the DPC aims to expand its engagement with DPO
networks, and any formal or informal groups of DPOs or
privacy professionals are invited to get in touch.

PAGE 98

DATA PROTECTION OFFICERS

From left to right – Commissioner Dale Sunderland, Professor Joyce O’Connor, Deputy Commissioner MB Donnelly, Professor Martin Curley and
Commissioner Dr. Des Hogan

DPO Conference
On 29 November 2024, the DPC hosted its DPO Network
conference “Supporting DPO Success” in the Cusack Suite
of Croke Park in Dublin. This conference was organised in
accordance with the DPC’s commitment to championing,
supporting and promoting the development of DPOs and
Privacy Professionals, reinforcing a sense of community and
empowerment among those working in the Data Protection
sector. The day provided a networking opportunity for DPOs
and Privacy Professionals, while also delivering helpful and
insightful presentations on a range of topics relevant to DPOs
and Privacy Professionals.
The event consisted of seven information sessions delivered
by industry experts, addressing and discussing key areas
of interest for DPOs and Privacy Professionals. The day’s
opening session with the Commissioners focused on the
power of cooperation and the DPC’s belief in the importance
of supporting DPOs, setting the tone for a day centred on
championing DPO success. Sessions also focused on GDPR

and Innovation, the skills required to be a DPO, examining
the protection of children’s data in online spaces and
offering tips on how to engage with the DPC. The event
was a day of learning and successful collaboration within
the DPO community.
Overall, feedback on the conference has been very positive
and has highlighted a keen interest in similar events hosted
by the DPC for DPOs and Privacy Professionals. The DPC DPO
Network Team have made these recordings available on the
DPC website QR 2, as part of the resources rolling out for
DPOs for 2025, alongside a planned series of informational
webinars catering to the needs of DPOs and
Privacy Professionals.
QR 2

9

International
Activities

PAGE 99

PAGE 100

INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES

International Activities
European Data Protection Board and Supervisory Bodies
Each EU Member State and EEA country10 has a national data protection
supervisory authority responsible for enforcing data protection laws and
regulation within their jurisdiction. The European Data Protection Board
(EDPB) is an independent body responsible for ensuring that the GDPR
and Law Enforcement Directive are consistently applied in EU and EEA
chairperson, two deputy chairpersons and members of each national
data protection authority and the European Data Protection Supervisor.
It meets at monthly plenary and expert subgroup meetings and has the
following main tasks:
• To issue opinions, guidelines, recommendations and best practices
to promote a common understanding of the GDPR and the Law
Enforcement Directive;
• To advise the European Commission on any issue related to the
protection of personal data in the Union;
• To contribute to the consistent application of the GDPR, in particular
in cross-border data protection cases; and
• To promote cooperation and the effective exchange of information
and best practices between national supervisory authorities.
In 2024, the DPC attended and actively participated at all monthly
EDPB plenary meetings, as well as expert subgroup meetings
(over 180 meetings in total).

10

European Economic Area. The EEA includes Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway..

INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES

PAGE 101

In March 2024, Commissioners, Des Hogan and Dale Sunderland met with European Commissioner for Justice Didier Reynders in Brussels.

Enhanced cooperation with other EDPB Supervisory Authorities 2024
Recognising the importance placed on cooperation in
cross-border matters under the GDPR, the DPC continued
its engagement with its fellow European Data Protection
Supervisory Authorities in day-to day operations under the
One Stop Shop (OSS) in the performance of its role as a
Lead Supervisory Authority. This included responding to
routine requests for information, follow up communications
and actions on OSS complaints, providing updates on OSS
inquiries and supervision cases.
In recognition of the importance of its international
engagement work, the DPC created a “Head of EDPB/
International Affairs” post at Deputy Commissioner level
in October 2024.
As part of the on-going co-operation and communication
between the DPC and the other EU/EEA Supervisory
Authorities in 2024, the DPC received 1,175 voluntary
and formal mutual assistance requests from other
European Regulators.

In 2024, the DPC submitted the following to the GDPR Article
60 cooperation process:
•
Draft Decisions 7
•
Final Decisions 11
Of the seven (7) Draft Article 60 Decisions, four (4) were
large scale inquiries which received no objections.
Enhanced cooperation the DPC engaged in at all levels across
all functions during 2024 contributed to this outcome, with
a focus on ensuring that EDPB Supervisory Authorities were
kept informed of DPC activities on draft and final decisions at
all stages of proceedings.
In addition, the DPC submitted, through the Article 60
cooperation mechanism, 115 notifications of amicable
resolutions achieved in cross-border complaints.
As a Concerned Supervisory Authority, the DPC reviewed 112
Article 60 Draft Decisions/ Revised Draft Decisions and 31
Informal Consultations sent to it by peer DPAs during
the year.

PAGE 102

The DPC also facilitated numerous bilateral engagement
meetings with members of EDBP Supervisory Authorities
at all levels on various topics including complaints,
inquiries, best practices and matters of individual
concern to specific supervisory authorities.
As part of its engagement with supervisory authorities at
a European level, the DPC:
•
Held Commissioner level engagements with
various EDPB Supervisory Authorities, including
visits to Finland in April and France in June;
•
Participated in the European Conference of Data
Protection Authorities in Riga, Latvia;
•
Participated in the European Case Handling 		
Workshop in Tallinn, Estonia;
•
Represented the European Data Protection Board
at the High Level Group for the Digital Markets Act;
•
Represented the European Data Protection Board
at the High Level Group Sub-Group for data related
obligations of the Digital Markets Act;
•
Represented the European Data Protection 		
Board at Working Group 6 – Protection of Minors
of the European Board for Digital Services;
•
Welcomed the Serbian Data Protection Authority
for a study visit to the DPC;
•
Welcomed a secondee from the European Data
Protection Board Secretariat; and
•
The DPC sent a secondee to the Dutch DPA
and a secondee to the EDPB;
The DPC aimed to continue participating in the
secondee programme in 2025. In addition, the DPC
had one official on secondment in Brussels since
October under the NEPT Secondment programme.

INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES

European Case Handling Workshop in
Tallinn, Estonia
DPC participation in the European Case Handling Workshop
in Tallinn, Estonia,
On the 5th and 6th of December 2024, four delegates
from the DPC’s national and cross-border complaint
handling teams participated in the European Case Handling
Workshop (ECHW) 2024, which took place in Tallinn, Estonia.
The workshop, which was attended by EDPB members,
provided a platform for DPAs to discuss case handling in
their organisations and share practical knowledge and
experience of cases.
During the two-day session, workshops were held on a
range of topics, including the AI act and the role of DPAs,
data breaches, video surveillance, Data Protection Impact
Assessments, and the relationship between controllers and
processors.
Representatives from the DPC hosted a workshop titled
“Dealing with complex cases: social media, definition of
‘personal data’, special categories of personal data.” The
DPC gave a presentation outlining the life-cycle of a crossborder complaint handled by the DPC, which covered each
stage of the process, from the initial receipt of the complaint
to its resolution. The DPC highlighted in particular the key
steps and coordination with other supervisory authorities
involved in dealing with cross-border complaints. Articles 15
(Right of access) and 17 (Right to erasure) of the GDPR were
explored in depth with the other DPAs, using detailed DPC
case studies of complex cases.
The DPC presentation contributed to a beneficial discussion
with other DPAs on the topic as well as an exchange of
knowledge and experience of dealing with complex cases.

INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES

Cooperation with International
Supervisory Authorities 2024
Further to engagement at a European level, the DPC
engaged with international supervisory authorities,
including:
•
Bilateral engagement with: the UK Information
Commissioner’s Office; Australian Privacy
Commissioner; Office of the Privacy Commissioner for
Bermuda; US Federal Trade Commission and the Office
of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada.
•
Participation at the Global Privacy Assembly in Jersey,
United Kingdom.
•
Participation in the British, Irish and Islands Data
Protection Authorities (BIIDPA) Forum.
•
Welcomed a secondee from the Office of the Privacy
Commissioner for Bermuda.
In 2025 the DPC hopes to continue to expand its
international engagement efforts at both European and
International levels.

Attaché Position – Brussels
The DPC undertook a pilot project to establish a full time
Attaché in Brussels for an initial 12-month period from May
2023 to May 2024. The Attaché met regularly with key DPC
stakeholders based in Brussels, including the European
Commission, the European Data Protection Board and
its subgroups, Members of the European Parliament,
Civil Society Organisations and Data Controllers with
representatives based in Brussels.

PAGE 103

Throughout 2024, negotiations were ongoing in the
European Parliament and European Council in relation
to the Proposal for a Regulation to Harmonize GDPR
Procedural Rules, which meant that a large amount of the
engagement with the Attaché focused on this topic. Other
topics of interest to Brussels based stakeholders included
the DPC’s Regulatory Strategy and the numerous large scale
inquiries which had been completed by the DPC in 2023 and
2024. Brussels based stakeholders provided feedback to the
DPC that they appreciated having a DPC presence available
to them and recommended that the position be continued
beyond its pilot phase. In addition to Brussels based
stakeholders, the central location of Brussels facilitated
DPC engagements with fellow European Data Protection
Regulators on the margins of meetings or data protection
related events in Brussels. The Attaché also arranged
for high-level meetings between the Commissioners and
prominent stakeholders during a visit to Brussels, including:
•
European Commissioner for Justice;
•
Head of Data Protection Unit, Directorate General
Justice, European Commission;
•
Chair of the European Data Protection Board;
•
European Data Protection Supervisor;
•
The European Consumer Organisation (BEUC); and
•
European Digital Rights Network.
Following on from this successful pilot phase, the DPC
decided to continue the position and will continue to
develop the DPC’s presence in Brussels.

PAGE 104

INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES

Staff from Serbian Commission visits DPC

Study Visit - Commissioner for
Information of Public Importance and
Personal Data Protection in Serbia
In September 2024, the DPC welcomed a delegation from
the Commissioner for Information of Public Importance
and Personal Data Protection in Serbia. This visit was part
of an EU-funded project to support the Serbian Ministry of
Justice in preparing for accession to the EU, managed by the
German Ministry for Development.
The Commissioners welcomed the delegation and
introduced the DPC staff from Legal, International Affairs
and Supervision a number of units who presented on
the work of the DPC.

Study Visit: Students of “New Media”,
Copenhagen, Denmark
In 2024, the DPC twice hosted students of “New Media”
from Copenhagen, Denmark; first in April and then again
in October. The DPC shared insights with the students into
its remit as a regulatory body under the GDPR, as well the
work the DPC undertakes in order to meet that brief. The
importance of the GDPR and data protection in the context
of Social Media was also discussed, which was of particular
relevance to their studies.

INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES

PAGE 105

Commissioners, Des Hogan and Dale Sunderland met with European Data Protection Board (EDPB) Chair Anu Talus in March 2024 when in Brussels.

Certification
Certification has been a growing area for supervisory
authorities across the EU in 2024.
In Ireland, the DPC is the supervisory authority responsible
for approval of data protection criteria or mechanisms in
certification schemes, while the Irish National Accreditation
Board (INAB) is responsible for the accreditation of
Certification Bodies (CBs) that intend operating such
schemes.
The DPC worked closely with its EU colleagues at the
European Data Protection Board (EDPB) during 2024 on the
assessment of a number of national and EU certification
schemes in addition to improving internal procedures and
developing further guidelines for stakeholders.
There are currently two approved European Certification
Schemes. A register of approved Schemes can be found
on the EDPB’s website: www.edpb.europa.eu. Whilst no
certification body in Ireland have sought accreditation
to offer certifications under any of these EU certification
schemes to date,  certification bodies have been set up
in other members states and controllers and processors

are encouraged to explore the possibility of seeking to be
certified by those certification bodies under these Schemes.  
Work also continued on finalising an inter-agency
agreement between the DPC and Irish National
Accreditation Board on accreditation of certification
schemes under GDPR Articles 42 and 43 and we have held
a number of productive meetings to progress matters.
Following workshops held in Spain and Luxembourg in
2023, the DPC, along with its EU colleagues, formally set up
channels of communication with Europe Accreditation (EA )
in 2024 with the aim of understanding our respective roles
under GDPR Certification and ensuring consistency and
coherence in the application process throughout the EU.
It is anticipated that future engagements with EA will lead
to a standardised approach to certification assessments
throughout Europe which can be reflected in agreements at
a national level such as between the DPC and Irish National
Accreditation Board.
The DPC is currently reviewing two EU Certification
Schemes. It is anticipated that the DPC will be in a position
to submit a Scheme to the EDPB for review in 2025.

PAGE 106

INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES

Commissioner Des Hogan speaking at EDPS conference

EDPB Coordinated Enforcement
(CEF) 2024
The DPC participated in the 2024 Coordinated Enforcement
Framework (CEF) Topic “The Implementation of the Right
of Access”. EDPB members including the DPC decided to
prioritise this topic as it is at the heart of data protection
and one of the most frequently exercised data protection
rights. 30 supervisory authorities across the EEA launched
coordinated actions into the compliance of certain data
controllers with the right of access under the GDPR. The
DPC participated in this action as a fact-finding exercise
with data controllers mainly established in Ireland. This
action aligned with the DPC Regulatory Strategy 2022-27
to cooperate and communicate with peer data protection
authorities on emerging issues.
The DPC contacted 30 data controllers with a view to:
•
Ensuring that the right of access can be effectively
exercised by data subjects and assess how controllers
comply with the right of access in practice; and
•
Raising awareness of the requirements applicable to
the right of access The EDPB has adopted extensive
guidance on this topic, through its Guidelines 01/2022.
Following the collation of the completed questionnaires,
the DPC produced an aggregated national report, which
was fed into the broader EDPB report. The completed EDPB
report including the DPC national report is available on
the European Data Protection Board QR 1.

QR 1

The DPC identified three substantive issues during
this exercise:
1. The responses clearly show that  subject access
requests account for the majority of data protection
requests they received in 2023, mostly 90% of requests
and upwards.
2. Some excellent examples were provided of managing
SARs particularly when engaging with customers who
may need assistance due to a vulnerability or difficulty.
For example, controllers would treat SARs on a caseby-case basis and engage with vulnerable customer
support teams were necessary, as well as seeking the
assistance of appropriate external support agencies.
3. The report found mainly a high level of awareness and
understanding of the EDPB Guidelines 01/2022 on
the right of access. However, this was not across the
board, and some respondents’ level of awareness and
understanding could have been better. Respondents
who identified that they had proper data protection
and governance units and teams across all organisation
showed a better understanding of the Guidelines
01/2022.
In a consultative capacity, the DPC will engage with
some respondents in this action based on the replies
received. The DPC does not intend to carry out any
formal investigations.

INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES

International Transfers - Binding
Corporate Rules
The DPC frequently takes a lead EU role in the assessment
and approval of Binding Corporate Rules (BCR) applications
from multinational companies. BCRs are a set of binding
data protection polices which underpin transfers when
group members established in the EU transfer data to
group members outside the EU.
A typical application consists of a large volume of
documentation, comprising all the policies required
to demonstrate the commitments being made along
with the contractual binding mechanism and any other
documents the group considers necessary to supplement
their application. The review can take some time and also
will involve seeking the views of two other SA’s during the
co-review phase and the views of all SA’s during the cooperation phase and co-ordinating and collating these
responses and discussing them with the applicant to come
to a draft that all SA’s are satisfied with. Once this stage is
reached an Opinion of the EDPB is sought under Article
64 (2) and DPC can formally approve the application
once received.

PAGE 107

Annual Updates
Once the BCR applications are approved, the DPC continues
to have a significant ongoing oversight role. Each BCR holder
is required to submit an update of their BCR on an annual
basis which will require review. In 2024 the DPC was lead
SA on 29 approved BCR for 19 different BCR holders.

Implementation of new
recommendations for controller
The EPDB updated the WP256 Referential for Controller
BCR applications. It is now called “Recommendations
1/2022 on the Application for Approval and on the elements
and principles to be found in Controller Binding Corporate
Rules (Art. 47 GDPR)”. Each BCR Holder using an approved
Controller BCR was required make the related changes as
part of their 2024 Annual Update. In 2024 this affected 17
of the already approved BCR files. The DPC issued detailed
information and material to assist these BCR holders to
bring their BCRs in line what was required. This was a
significantly increased body of work above a normal review
of an annual update. DPC has commenced its review on
all of these files and completed the review of 11. The list of
these approved BCR files is published on the DPC’s website.

2024 BCR
The DPC was BCR lead in relation to 16 BCR applications
from 11 different companies.  Two of those applications
were submitted to the EDPB seeking an Article 64 Opinion
and subsequently approved by DPC in 2024 –Processor BCR
application for Accenture Global Holdings Limited (AGHL)
and Controller and Processor BCR applications for Aptiv
Global Operations Limited.
The DPC also assisted other European Data Protection
authorities by acting as co-reviewer for another SA on
9 BCR applications.

BCR lead in relation
to 16 BCR applications
from 11 different
companies

BCR Workshop 2024
In April 2024 approximately 50 representatives from Data
Protection Authorities all over the EEA met in Vilnius,
Lithuania for the biennial BCR Workshop. The purpose
of this workshop is the training of new colleagues starting
to deal with BCR applications by more experienced
colleagues sharing their knowledge. There is also a hugely
important brainstorming and experience sharing element
where the SA’s attempt to solve case studies and address
the questions that have been raised the most during
assessment of BCR applications. This aids the consistency
of approach but also improves the knowledge of all SA’s.
DPC delivered a presentation at the workshop entitled “BCR
procedure: from A to Z” which was very well received.

PAGE 108

INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES

BCR Workshop April 2024 Vilnius Lithuania

BCR application in focus
Aptiv Global Operations Limited
Aptiv Global Operations Limited (Aptiv) is a global technology
company that designs, develops and manufactures software
and hardware solutions operating in approximately 50
different countries around the world. Aptiv workforce,
customer and vendor data may be dealt with by its
operations based in third countries, therefore, they need
to ensure they have met the conditions of Chapter V of
the GDPR prior to any transfers taking place. The group
determined that a BCR would be the best option to provide
adequate safeguards when they needed to transfer data
within the group for scenarios where they acted as both a
Controller and a Processor.
As Aptiv’s EEA data protection compliance programme is
centred in Ireland, Aptiv approached the DPC to act as
BCR Lead to seek approval for their BCR. DPC assessed
the application material provided to ensure the criteria
required to act as Lead BCR under WP263 was being met.
Once satisfied the information provided during the initial
application process DPC informed all SAs that it was happy
to act as the BCR lead and provided them with opportunity

to object. As there were no objections the DPC advised Aptiv
we could act as their BCR lead and requested the full suite
of documentation.
DPC reviewed the BCR documentation and provided
comments back and forth with the applicant until the DPC
were satisfied that the BCR was meeting the requirements
set out in the elements and principles of the 01/2022
recommendations. Issues that typically arise during
BCR assessment phases are where the applicants fail to
demonstrate where they are making the commitments.
As part of the assessment of all BCR files, DPC will advise
on where the text requires amendment often providing
drafting suggestions and signposting what part of the
recommendations need to be reflected more fully.
The EDPB issued a positive Opinion 23/2024 in November
2024 on this BCR file and DPC confirmed its approval by
way of a National Decision issued to the applicant in
November 2024.

10
INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES

Human Resources,
Communications and
Corporate Governance

PAGE 109

PAGE 110

HUMAN RESOURCES, COMMUNICATIONS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

Human Resources
Recruitment
In 2024, the Data Protection Commission (DPC) continued
to invest in building organisational capability by successfully
onboarding 70 new staff members across a range of grades
and functions. This was achieved through a strategic and
multifaceted recruitment approach that included open and
confined competitions, interdepartmental mobility, and the
utilisation of Publicjobs open and interdepartmental  panels.
Recruitment activity throughout the year focused on
ensuring the DPC has the right expertise to meet current
and emerging demands. Key DPC specific competitions
and appointment processes initiated or concluded in 2024
included the following roles:
•
Confined Principal Officer Competition
•
Higher Executive Officer (HEO) Legal Analyst
•
Private Secretary to the Commissioners
•
DPC Attaché to Brussels (Assistant Principal)
•
Director of Legal
•
Confined Executive Officer (EO) Competition
These appointments reflect the DPC’s ongoing commitment
to ensuring a high-performing workforce that supports the
effective delivery of its regulatory mandate.
2024

2023

2022

New Joiners

70

44

45

Leavers

27

24

45

Internal Promotions

21

15

33

DPC total Headcount Information

2024

Date

No.

1st January 2023

196

1st January 2024

213

1st January 2025

251

Two new functional areas were created within the
organisation in response to the increased remit of the
DPC – with Deputy Commissioners appointed to lead in
the areas of EDPB/International Affairs & AI Act and InterRegulatory Affairs.

Employee Engagement
During 2024, building on the DPC’s Regulatory Strategy
2022-27, the DPC’s Employee Engagement Forum
commenced work on developing a DPC statement of values,
which will articulate the core beliefs and principles guiding
the organisation. This statement aims to establish clear
expectations for employee behaviour and decision-making
while fostering a sense of belonging and purpose among
staff. By enhancing employees’ understanding of how their
roles contribute to the broader mission of the DPC, the
forum seeks to strengthen engagement.
Industrial and Employee Relations
Ongoing engagement with representative unions/
associations continued through the Departmental Council,
with three meetings held throughout the year. Employee
Relations support was provided to line managers and staff
on a variety of issues.
Equality, Diversity & Inclusion (EDI) Committee
The EDI Committee, was established in June 2024. It is
dedicated to creating an environment at work that values
and capitalises on each person’s distinct viewpoints and
experiences inside the DPC.
The EDI Committee will form an important part of an
overall DPC People Strategy and will contribute to the
DPC’s implementation of the “Workforce of the Future”
pillar of the Public Service Transformation 2030 Strategy.
Bespoke training for all the members of the Committee
in partnership with the Irish Centre for Diversity was
undertaken. During 2024, the Committee held three
meetings and it will bring forward a range of initiatives
throughout 2025 in line with its Terms of Reference.

HUMAN RESOURCES, COMMUNICATIONS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

Communications
Throughout 2024, the DPC has promoted data protection
awareness through effective outreach, stakeholder
engagement and transparent communication. The DPC is
committed to raising the public’s awareness of their data
protection rights and how they can control the use of their
personal data.
The DPC actively engages with the media, members of the
public and other stakeholders through a range of channels
including; press releases, media interviews, social media
campaigns, podcasts and the DPC’s website, all to ensure
they are kept up to date with the DPC’s activities and
decisions. Over the course of 2024, the DPC published a
total of 26 press releases leading to significant coverage on
international and national level media. The Commissioners
and members of staff contributed to over 80 speaking
events in 2024.

26
press
releases

PAGE 111

The DPC’s social media platforms continued to play an
important role in the communications of the DPC in 2024.
The growth of the DPC’s social media presence across X
(Formerly Twitter) and LinkedIn, was integral to the support
of its awareness-raising and communications activities.
The combined followers across both platforms increased
by over 3,700 during 2024, to over 51,800, an increase of
7.7% on last year’s figures. There was exceptionally strong
engagement of nearly 57,000 interactions, with an average
engagement rate per impression of 5.65%.
Additionally in 2024, following the completion of a project
aimed at increasing website accessibility for users, the DPC
received an honourable mention in the executive summary
of the EU Web Accessibility Directive (EUWAD) Report 2024
published by National Disability Authority (NDA).
The accessibility score for www.dataprotection.ie
increased from 35.5% to 94.0% in 2024.

80
speaking
events

average
engagement
rate of 5.65%

social media
presence increase
of 7.7%
accessibility score for
www.dataprotection.ie
increased from
35.5% to 94.0%

New Guidance produced by the DPC in 2024

Managing your
Digital Footprint
(Blog)

AI, Large Language
Models and Data
Protection (Blog)

Data Protection
Toolkit for
Schools

PAGE 112

HUMAN RESOURCES, COMMUNICATIONS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

DPC New Premises
The DPC received sanction from the Department of Public
Expenditure, NDP Delivery and Reform for the leasing of
office space at 6 Pembroke Row, Dublin 2 in 2021.
Work continued throughout 2024 to complete the build
and fit-out of the DPC’s new headquarters. A contract for
the fit-out of the building was awarded by the OPW, with
the contractor arriving on-site at the end of March 2024
and these works were to be completed by January 2025,
at which point the building was to be handed over to the
DPC for the final stages of fit-out.
The DPC appointed a Project Board in 2024 to oversee
the transition. The Board included Senior Management
from the People and Learning, Enterprise & Operations
ICT, Governance Finance & Risk and Complaints Handling
business units. The Project Board is supported by
members of the Corporate Services and Information &
Communication Technologies teams.

Corporate Governance
DPC Audit and Risk Committee
DPC Audit and Risk Committee In line with the Corporate
Governance Standard for the Civil Service (2015), and
also with regard to the Code of Practice for the Governance
of State Bodies (2016), the DPC established its own
Audit and Risk Committee, as a Committee of the DPC,
effective from 1 January 2020.
The second term of the Audit and Risk Committee
commenced on January 1 2023 and runs for three years.
The members of the Committee are:
•
Conan McKenna (chairperson);
•
Aisling McKeon;
•
Tara McDermott;
•
Michael Horgan; and
•
Graham Doyle.
Four meetings of the Audit and Risk Committee were
held in 2024.

Internal Audit function
The Internal Audit function in the DPC is provided by an
external service provider who provides regular reports to
the DPC Audit and Risk Committee on internal audits
carried out during the year.
Official Languages Act 2003
The DPC’s fifth Language Scheme under the Official
Languages Act 2003 commenced on 21 December 2020
and will remain in effect until the introduction of language
standards following the Official Languages (Amendment)
Act 2021. The DPC continues to provide, and improve Irish
language services with enhancements of services, as per
the existing Scheme.
Ethics in Public Office Act 1995 and Standards in Public
Office Act 2001
The DPC was established under the Data Protection Act
2018 and operates in accordance with the provisions of
that Act. Measures are in place to ensure that the staff of
the DPC, holding designated positions, comply with the
provisions of the Ethics in Public Office Act, 1995 and the
Standards in Public Office Act, 2001.
Regulation of Lobbying Act 2015
The Lobbying Act 2015 together with its associated code
of conduct, regulations and guidelines aims to ensure that
lobbying activities are conducted in accordance with public
expectations of transparency. The Commissioners for Data
Protection are Designated Public Officials under this Act, as
noted on the DPC website.
Interactions between lobbying bodies and Designated
Public Officials must be reported by the lobbyists.
The Standards in Public Office Commission (SIPO) has
established an online register of lobbying at
www.Lobbying.ie to facilitate this requirement.

HUMAN RESOURCES, COMMUNICATIONS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

Engagement with Oireachtas members
In accordance with the Department of Public Expenditure,
NDP Delivery and Reform, Circular 25 of 2016, the DPC
provides a dedicated mailbox to address the queries of
Oireachtas members and to receive feedback.
Section 42 of the Irish Human Rights and Equality
Commission Act 2014
Public Sector Equality and Human Rights Duty
The DPC seeks to meet obligations under Section 42 of the
Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission Act 2014 and
has put in place measures to ensure that consideration is
given to human rights and equality in the development of
policies, procedures and engagement with stakeholders
in fulfilling its mandate to protect the fundamental right to
data protection.
Accessibility Officer
To support customers who may require assistance when
engaging with the services provided by the DPC, the
Accessibility Officer may be contacted via the channels listed
on the DPC website, and below:

PAGE 113

Freedom of Information (FOI)
In 2024, the DPC received a total of 39 FOI requests.
Three were granted, four were partially granted and 28
were deemed out of scope, with four ongoing as of 31
December 2024. The DPC’s regulatory activity is exempted
from FOI requests in order to preserve the confidentiality
of the DPC’s supervisory, investigatory and enforcement
activities. Nevertheless, the DPC is committed to providing
transparent information to the public around the
administration of its office and use of public resources.

39 FOI requests
4
Partially
granted

3
Granted

3
Ongoing

Postal address:
Accessibility Officer Data Protection Commission
6 Pembroke Row
Dublin 2
D02 X963
Ireland
Email: DPCAccessibilityOfficer@dataprotection.ie
Customer Charter
The DPC’s Customer Charter and accompanying Quality
Customer Service Action Plan and Managing Unreasonable
Behaviour and Contacts Policy for 2024 – 2026 are
published on the DPCs website.
There is a designated customer service comments
mailbox for customers to engage with the DPC. Any and all
comments received are taken into consideration as part of
the on-going review of delivering quality customer service.

28
out of
scope

Parliamentary Questions (PQs)
The DPC received 28 PQs in 2024 and provided
observations in response to 13 of these questions.
Elected Representative Correspondence
The DPC received 9 pieces of correspondence from elected
representatives in 2024, across all business areas.
Access to Information on the Environment
The DPC received no requests in 2024 under the AIE
Regulations.

PAGE 114

Appendix 1: Report on
Protected Disclosures
received by the Data
Protection Commission
in 2024

APPENDIX 1: REPORT ON PROTECTED DISCLOSURES RECEIVED BY THE DATA PROTECTION COMMISSION IN 2024

PAGE 115

The policy operated by the Data Protection Commission (DPC) under
the terms of the Protected Disclosures Acts 2014 and 2022 is designed
to facilitate and encourage all workers to raise genuine concerns about
possible internal wrongdoing in the workplace, so that these concerns
can be investigated following the principles of natural justice and
addressed in a manner appropriate to the circumstances of the case.
Section 22 of the Protected Disclosures Act 2014,
substituted by Section 30 of the Protected Disclosures
(Amendment) Act 2022, requires public bodies to prepare
and publish, by 1 March in each year, a report in relation
to the previous year in an anonymised form.
Pursuant to this requirement, the DPC confirms
that in 2024:
Fifty-two (52) potential protected disclosures (set out
in the table below) were received from individuals
external to the DPC in relation to issues pertaining to
data protection within other entities. These issues were
raised with the DPC in its role as a “prescribed person”
as provided for under Section 7 of the Protected Disclosures
Act (listed in SI 364/2020). Nineteen of the disclosures
were accepted as valid protected disclosures.

Protected Disclosures

52
received

Valid
Protected
Disclosures
19

Reference
Number

Type

Date Received

Status

Outcome

01/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

3 January 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

02/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

12 January 2024

Closed

Not accepted as a valid protected
disclosure, referred as a potential
complaint.

03/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

21 January 2024

Closed

Submission was not a protected
disclosure. DPC not the intended
authority.

04/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

2 February 2024

Closed

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

05/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

8 February 2024

Closed

Not accepted as a valid protected
disclosure, redirect to the Info Unit.

PAGE 116

APPENDIX 1: REPORT ON PROTECTED DISCLOSURES RECEIVED BY THE DATA PROTECTION COMMISSION IN 2024

Reference
Number

Type

Date Received

Status

Outcome

06/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

7 February 2024

Folded
into preexisting
case.

The report was incorporated as
a part of an existing protected
disclosure case.

07/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

21 February 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

08/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

1 March 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

09/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

5 March 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

10/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

5 March 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

11/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

19 March 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

12/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

28 March 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

13/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

10 April 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

14/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

19 April 2024

Closed

Not accepted as a valid protected
disclosure, redirect to the Info Unit.

15/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

30 April 2024

Closed

Reporting person requested that
their case be closed.

16/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

9 May 2024

Closed

Accepted. DPC engaged with the
organisation and were satisfied with
their policies. Case was concluded.

APPENDIX 1: REPORT ON PROTECTED DISCLOSURES RECEIVED BY THE DATA PROTECTION COMMISSION IN 2024

PAGE 117

Reference
Number

Type

Date Received

Status

Outcome

17/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

27 May 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

18/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

24 May 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

19/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

10 June 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

20/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

6 June 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

21/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

26 June 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

22/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

24 June 2024

Closed

Not accepted as a valid protected
disclosure, redirect to the Info Unit.

23/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

3 July 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up
when requested.

24/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

4 July 2024

Closed

Accepted. DPC engaged with the
organisation and were satisfied with
their policies. Case was concluded.

25/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

28 June 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

26/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

16 July 2024

Closed

Accepted. DPC engaged with the
organisation and were satisfied with
their policies. Case was concluded.

27/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

19 July 2024

Closed

Accepted. DPC engaged with the
organisation and were satisfied with
their policies. Case was concluded.

PAGE 118

APPENDIX 1: REPORT ON PROTECTED DISCLOSURES RECEIVED BY THE DATA PROTECTION COMMISSION IN 2024

Reference
Number

Type

Date Received

Status

Outcome

28/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

23 July 2024

Closed

Accepted. Case was transferred to
another supervisory authority (SA). The
DPC concluded the case on its end.

29/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

27 July 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

30/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

29 July 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

31/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

31 July 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up
when requested.

32/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

1 August 2024

Closed

Engaging with complainant at
year end.

33/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

2 August 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

34/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

6 August 2024

Closed

Accepted. DPC engaged with the
organisation and were satisfied with
their policies. Case was concluded.

35/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

9 August 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

36/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

13 August 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

37/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

21 August 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

38/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

22 August 2024

Closed

Not accepted as a valid protected
disclosure, redirect to the Info Unit.

39/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

3 September 2024

Closed

Reporting person requested that
their case be closed.

40/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

11 September 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

APPENDIX 1: REPORT ON PROTECTED DISCLOSURES RECEIVED BY THE DATA PROTECTION COMMISSION IN 2024

PAGE 119

Reference
Number

Type

Date Received

Status

Outcome

41/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

23 September 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

42/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

9 October 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

43/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

14 October 2024

Open

Engaging with complainant at year
end.

44/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

4 November 2024

Closed

Not accepted as a valid protected
disclosure, redirect to the Info Unit.

45/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

6 November 2024

Closed

Insufficient detail provided,
complainant did not follow up when
requested.

46/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

13 November 2024

Open

Engaging with complainant at year
end.

47/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

21 November 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

48/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

21 November 2024

Open

Engaging with complainant at year
end.

49/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

25 November 2024

Open

Accepted and referred for potential
investigation. Ongoing at year-end.

50/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

28 November 2024

Open

Engaging with complainant at year
end.

51/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

11 December 2024

Open

Engaging with complainant at year
end.

52/2024

Section 7 (external, to
“prescribed person”)

19 December 2024

Open

Engaging with complainant at year
end.

PAGE 120

Appendix 2: Report on
Energy Usage at the Data
Protection Commission

APPENDIX 2: ENERGY REPORT 2024

PAGE 121

Report on Energy Usage at the Data
Protection Commission
Overview of Energy Usage
General

The DPC continues to monitor its energy consumption and ways to assist
in the reduction of energy usage. We continue to participate in SEAI online
monitoring and are participating in the “Reduce your Use” campaign for
Winter 2024/25.
The DPC will be moving to a new Head Office in 2025 which
will significantly improve the DPC’s energy efficiency with the
closure of the 2 existing offices in Dublin. The new office has
a BER rating of A3.
Over the last number of years, we have made significant
progress in meeting the DPC’s energy efficiency and
greenhouse gas targets across the organisation.

DUBLIN
21 Fitzwilliam Square
The head office of the DPC was located at 21 Fitzwilliam
Square, Dublin 2 during 2024. Energy consumption for the
office was solely electricity, which was used for heating,
lighting and equipment usage.
21 Fitzwilliam Square is a protected building and is therefore
exempt from the energy rating system.
Satellite office
In 2024 the DPC maintained additional office space in Dublin
to accommodate the increase in its staff numbers. This
office was sourced by OPW and the DPC took occupancy
in October 2018. This office was to be maintained until a
new permanent head office was ready to facilitate the DPC’s
Dublin-based staff and operations in 2025. The Office is 828
sq mts in size.

Office Location

% Reduction in actual
consumption from
2019 base line

Fitzwilliam Sq - Electricity

22%

Satellite Office - Electricity

14%

Portarlington - Electricity

30%

Portarlington - Natural Gas

58%

Energy consumption for the building is solely electricity,
which is used for heating, lighting and equipment usage.
The energy rating for the building is C2.
PORTARLINGTON
The Portarlington office of the DPC has an area of 444
sq mts and is located on the upper floor of a two-storey
building, built in 2006.
Energy consumption for the office is electricity for lighting
and equipment usage and natural gas for heating.
The energy rating for the building is C1.

PAGE 122

APPENDIX 2: ENERGY REPORT 2024

Actions undertaken.
The DPC participates in the SEAI online system for the
purpose of reporting its energy usage in compliance with
the European Communities (Energy End-use Efficiency and
Energy Services) Regulations 2009 (S.I. No 542 of 2009).
The energy usage for the office for 2023 (last validated SEAI
figures available) is as follows:

Electrical

Natural Gas

Reduction of Waste Generated
•
DPC use a default printer setting to print documents
double-sided.
•
DPC has also introduced dual monitors for staff to
reduce the need to print documents to review /
compare against other documentation during
case work.
•
DPC provide General Waste and Recycling bins at
stations throughout the offices.
•
DPC has signed up for use of Brown Food waste bins.

Dublin
Fitzwilliam Sq.

61,653 kWH

Satellite Office

76,712 kWH

Maximisation of Recycling
DPC policy is to securely shred all waste paper. Consoles
are provided at multiple locations throughout the offices.
Shredded paper is recycled.

Portarlington
Portarlington Office

28,400 kWH

18,589 kWH

Overview of Environmental policy /statement for
the organisation
The DPC is committed to operate in line with Government
of Ireland environmental and sustainability policies.
Outline of environmental sustainability initiatives
•
Purchase of single use plastics ceased since
January 2019.
•
Ongoing replacement of fluorescent lighting with LED
lighting in Portarlington office as units fail or require
replacement bulbs.
•
Installation of sensor lights in refurbished area of
Portarlington office.
•
Sensor lighting in use in Satellite office.
•
Introduction of Government Energy
Conservation plans.
•
Sensor lighting introduced in Bathrooms
Portarlington Office.

Sustainable Procurement
PC procurements and processes are fully compliant with
Sustainable Procurement. Catering contracts stipulate the
exclusion of single use plastics.

PAGE 123

Appendix 3: Statement
of Internal Controls

PAGE 124

APPENDIX 3: ENERGY REPORT 2024

Appendix 3:
Statement of Internal Controls
DPC Statement of Internal Controls The Financial Statement of
the Data Protection Commission for the year 1 January 2024 to 31
December 2024 and its Statement of Internal Controls for the
same period are in preparation by the DPC and will be appended
to this report following the completion of an audit in respect of
2024 by the Comptroller and Auditor General.

INDEX

PAGE 125

Index
A

G

Access: 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 29, 54, 85, 106, 113
Access Request: 23, 24, 54
AI: 2, 8, 9, 13, 18, 51, 68, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 92, 102, 110,
111
Article 60: 28, 43, 46, 48, 49, 52, 53, 54, 55, 101
Artificial Intelligence: 2, 9, 12, 88

Governance: 18, 88, 109, 112

B
Breach: 11, 21, 22, 27, 32, 33, 37, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46,
48, 49, 56, 61, 64
Breach Complaints: 33

C
CCTV: 20, 21, 29, 30, 36, 37, 39, 58, 74, 75, 82
Cross-border: 6, 12, 18 , 28, 43, 52, 100, 101, 102

D
Data controller: 24, 30, 37, 40, 41, 50, 53, 60, 68, 79, 80,
85, 95
Decision: 23, 28, 37, 39, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 53,
54, 55, 56, 58, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 79, 86, 110
Disclosure: 20, 33, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119
DPO: 2, 9, 20, 32, 71, 95, 96, 97, 98

E
Electronic direct marketing: 17, 22, 26
Employee: 110
Erasure: 22, 24
Erasure request: 25, 52, 53, 55
European Union: 38, 64, 72, 84, 88

F
Financial: 32, 40, 95

L
Law Enforcement Directive: 2, 17, 22, 29, 33, 56, 74, 75,
76, 100
LED: 2, 17, 18, 22, 29, 33, 77, 122

N
Notification: 21, 48, 86

P
Personal data: 8, 9, 12, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 29,
30, 33, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50,
51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 61, 64, 66, 67, 68, 71, 73, 74,
76, 77, 78, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 91, 93, 100, 102,
111
Processing: 8, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 29, 30, 35, 36,
37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54,
55, 56, 57, 58, 64, 66, 68, 71, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80,
81, 82, 84, 85, 86, 87, 93

R
Request: 23, 24, 25, 52, 53, 54, 55, 74, 76, 83, 87
Resolution: 20, 25, 28, 33, 102
Right: 22, 24, 84, 102, 106
Rights: 17, 23, 38, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 103, 113

T
Transparency: 38, 44, 47, 52, 53, 56, 75, 78, 80, 84, 85, 86,
92, 112

PAGE 126

Notes

NOTES

NOTES

Notes

PAGE 127

