In the matter of the General Data Protection Regulation
DPC Inquiry Reference: IN-18-5-6

In the matter of JG, a complainant, concerning a complaint directed against WhatsApp Ireland Limited
in respect of the WhatsApp Service

Decision of the Data Protection Commission made pursuant to Section 113 of the Data Protection Act,
2018 and Articles 60 and 65 of the General Data Protection Regulation

Further to a complaint-based inquiry commenced pursuant to Section 110 of the Data Protection Act
2018

DECISION

Decision-Maker for the Commission:
Helen Dixon
________________________________
Commissioner for Data Protection
Dated the 12th day of January 2023

Data Protection Commission
21 Fitzwilliam Square South
Dublin 2, Ireland

1. INTRODUCTION AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
PURPOSE OF THIS DOCUMENT
1.1

This document is a decision (“the Decision”) of the Data Protection Commission (“the
Commission”), made in accordance with Section 113 of the Data Protection Act 2018 (“the 2018
Act”), arising from an inquiry conducted by the Commission, pursuant to Section 110 of the 2018
Act (“the Inquiry”).

1.2

The Inquiry, which commenced on 20 August 2018, examined whether WhatsApp Ireland Limited
(“WhatsApp”) complied with its obligations under the EU General Data Protection Regulation
(Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council) (“the GDPR”) in respect
of the subject matter of a complaint made by Mrs. J.G. (“the Complainant”). The complaint was
referred to the Commission by the Hamburg Data Protection Authority: Der Hamburgische
Beauftragte für Datenschutz und Informationsfreiheit (“the Hamburg DPA“) on 25 May 2018 (“the
Complaint“). The Hamburg DPA subsequently passed the Complaint to the German Federal Data
Protection Authority, the relevant national authority: Bundesbeauftragter für den Datenschutz
und die Informationsfreiheit (“the German Federal DPA“). The Complainant is at all times
represented by noyb – European center for digital rights.

1.3

This Decision further reflects the binding decision that was made by the European Data Protection
Board (the “EDPB” or, otherwise, the “Board”), pursuant to Article 65(2) of the GDPR 1 (the
“Article 65 Decision”), which directed changes to certain of the positions reflected in the draft
decision that was presented by the Commission for the purposes of Article 60 GDPR (“the Draft
Decision”) as detailed further below. The Article 65 Decision will be published on the website of
the EDPB, in accordance with Article 65(5) of the GDPR, and a copy of same is attached at Schedule
2 to this Decision.

1.4

Further details of procedural matters are set out in Schedule 1 to this Decision.

2. FACTUAL BACKGROUND AND THE COMPLAINT
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
2.1

WhatsApp is an online instant messaging platform. In order to access the WhatsApp service, a
prospective user must create a WhatsApp account. To create a WhatsApp account, a prospective
user is required to accept a series of terms and conditions, referred to by WhatsApp as its Terms
of Service (the “Terms of Service”). When a prospective user accepts the Terms of Service, the
terms contained therein constitute a contract between the (new) user and WhatsApp. It is only
on acceptance of the Terms of Service that the individual becomes a registered WhatsApp user.

Binding Decision 5/2022 on the dispute submitted by the Irish SA on WhatsApp Ireland Limited, adopted 5
December 2022

1

2

2.2

In April 2018, WhatsApp updated the Terms of Service to give effect to changes it sought to
implement to comply with the obligations which would arise when the GDPR became applicable
from 25 May 2018. Obligations introduced by the GDPR include, inter alia, a requirement that
organisations processing personal data have a lawful basis for any such processing. Legal bases
provided for in the GDPR include consent of the data subject, necessity based on the requirement
to fulfil a contract with the data subject or processing based on the legitimate interests of the
data controller. In addition, such organisations are required to provide detailed information to
users at the time personal data is obtained in relation to the purposes of any data processing and
the legal basis for any such processing. In essence, there must be a legal basis for each processing
operation or sets of operations (of personal data) and there are transparency requirements in
respect of the communication of such information to individual users.

2.3

To continue to access the WhatsApp service, all users were required to accept the updated Terms
of Service prior to 25 May 2018. The updated Terms of Service were brought to the attention of
existing users by way of a series of information notices and options, referred to as an
“engagement flow” or “user flow”. The engagement flow was designed to guide users through
the processing of accepting the updated Terms of Service; the option to accept the updated
“terms” was presented to users at the final stage of the engagement flow. As referenced in the
full text of the Terms of Service, a separate Privacy Policy provides information to users on
WhatsApp’s processing of personal data in respect of the service.

2.4

Existing users were not provided with an opportunity to disagree and continue to use the service,
to copy their account, or to delete their account. The only available choice was to accept the
Terms of Service, stop using the app or uninstall the app. 2

2.5

Figures 2.1 below is a screenshot of the final stage of the “engagement flow” which brought an
existing user, the Complainant, through the process of accepting the updated Terms of Service.
The screenshot is in German; an English translation can be found below.

2

Complaint, paragraph 1.4.

3

Figure 2.1
2.6

An English translation (via machine-translation) of the text is as follows:
Figure 2.1: “Welcome to WhatsApp! Click “Agree and continue” to accept the WhatsApp Terms of
Service and the Privacy Policy”

OVERVIEW OF THE COMPLAINT
2.7

The Complaint was made in the context of WhatsApp’s updated Terms of Service and the
requirement for existing users to accept in accordance with the above formulation or to no longer
have access to the service.

2.8

In respect of the updated Terms of Service, the Complainant argues that she was given a binary
choice: either accept the Terms of Service and the associated Privacy Policy by selecting the
4

“accept” button, 3 or cease using the service. The Complainant’s argument is predicated on the
Data Policy being incorporated into the Terms of Service. This claim is disputed by WhatsApp. 4
The Complainant further alleges that WhatsApp relied on “forced consent” to process personal
data on the basis that “the controller required the data subject to agree to the entire privacy policy
and the new terms” 5 and did not give users a genuine choice to decline the updated terms without
suffering detriment.
2.9

In addition, the Complainant alleges that it is unclear which specific legal basis is being relied on
by the controller for each processing operation. Indeed, she argues that “[i]t remains,
nevertheless, unclear which exact processing operations the controller chooses to base on each
specific legal basis” 6 as “[t]he controller simply lists all six bases for lawful processing under Article
6 of the GDPR in its privacy policy without stating exactly which legal basis the controller relies
upon for each specific processing operation.” 7 In connection with this, the Complainant expresses
particular concern about reliance on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR as a legal basis for the processing
operations detailed in the Terms of Service; extracts from the Terms of Service which relate to
these processing operations are found below.

2.10

As the GDPR requires controllers to provide detailed information to users at the time when
personal data are obtained, including the provision of information about the purposes of the
processing as well as the legal bases for the processing, the Complainant argues that this lack of
information breaches the transparency obligations in the GDPR. 8

2.11

The sections of the Terms of Service (in the form that existed as at the date the Complaint was
made) that relate to the data processing complained of are as follows:
“Our Services:
If you live in a country in the European Economic Area (which includes the European
Union), and any other included country or territory (collectively referred to as the
"European Region"), WhatsApp Ireland Limited provides the services described below to
you; if you live in any other country except those in the European Region, it is WhatsApp

For completeness, it should be noted that WhatsApp disputes the claim that the Privacy Policy is part of the Terms
of Service, or that the Complainant “consented” to the Privacy Policy in the sense meant by Article 6(1)(a) GDPR.
4
WhatsApp submissions on Draft Inquiry Report, paragraphs 2.1-2.5.
5
Complaint, paragraph 1.3.
6
Ibid.
7
For completeness, it should be noted that the legal bases for processing of personal data include consent of the
data subject, necessity based on the requirement to fulfil a contract with the data subject or processing based on
the legitimate interests of the data controller. There is no hierarchy as between these legal bases set down in the
GDPR.
8
The Complaint, paragraph 2.3.1.
3

5

Inc. (collectively, "WhatsApp," "our," "we," or "us") that provides the services described
below to you (collectively, "Services")::
Privacy And Security Principles. Since we started WhatsApp, we've built our Services with
strong privacy and security principles in mind.
Connect you with people and organizations you care about
Connecting You With Other People. We provide ways for you to communicate with other
WhatsApp users including through messages, voice and video calls, sending images and
video, showing your status, and sharing your location with others when you choose. We
may provide a convenient platform that enables you to send and receive money to or
from other users across our platform. WhatsApp works with partners, service providers,
and affiliated companies to help us provide ways for you to connect with their services.
We use the information we receive from them to help operate, provide, and improve our
Services.
Ways To Improve Our Services. We analyze how you make use of WhatsApp, in order to
improve all aspects of our Services described here, including helping businesses who use
WhatsApp measure the effectiveness and distribution of their services and messages.
WhatsApp uses the information it has and also works with partners, service providers,
and affiliated companies to do this.
Communicating With Businesses. We provide ways for you and third parties, like
businesses, to communicate with each other using WhatsApp, such as through order,
transaction, and appointment information, delivery and shipping notifications, product
and service updates, and marketing. Messages you may receive containing marketing
could include an offer for something that might interest you. We do not want you to have
a spammy experience; as with all of your messages, you can manage these
communications, and we will honor the choices you make.
Safety And Security. We work to protect the safety and security of WhatsApp by
appropriately dealing with abusive people and activity and violations of our Terms. We
prohibit misuse of our Services, harmful conduct towards others, and violations of our
Terms and policies, and address situations where we may be able to help support or
protect our community. We develop automated systems to improve our ability to detect
and remove abusive people and activity that may harm our community and the safety and
security of our Services. If we learn of people or activity like this, we will take appropriate
action by removing such people or activity or contacting law enforcement. We share
information with other affiliated companies when we learn of misuse or harmful conduct
by someone using our Services.
6

Enabling Global Access To Our Services. To operate our global Service, we need to store
and distribute content and information in data centers and systems around the world,
including outside your country of residence. This infrastructure may be owned or operated
by our service providers or affiliated companies.
Affiliated Companies. We are part of the Facebook Companies. As part of the Facebook
Companies, WhatsApp receives information from, and shares information with, the
Facebook Companies as described in WhatsApp's Privacy Policy. We use the information
we receive from them to help operate, provide, and improve our Services. Learn more
about the Facebook Companies and their terms and polices here.
SCOPE OF THE COMPLAINT
2.12

I have carried out my assessment of the scope of the Complaint to the extent that it relates to
specified data processing and specified alleged infringements of the GDPR. A chronology of issues
that arose (1) as between the parties, and (2) as between the parties and the Commission, in the
course of establishing the substantive scope of the Complaint, is included in Schedule 1. Also
included in Schedule 1 are details of the approach I adopted in determining the issues raised. In
determining the precise parameters of the scope of the Complaint, I had regard, in the Draft
Decision, to the Complaint as a whole and, in particular, took note of the express statements in
the Complaint which define its scope. I also had regard, in the Draft Decision, to the Investigator’s
analysis in respect of the scope of the Complaint.

2.13

On his assessment of the Complaint, the Investigator concluded that there were four key issues
to be analysed in the context of his Inquiry: 9
a) Whether the data subject’s acceptance of WhatsApp’s Terms of Service, and/or Privacy
Policy should/must be construed as the provision of consent (within the meaning of
Articles 4(11) and 6(1)(a) GDPR) to processing described in those documents. 10
b) Whether WhatsApp is prohibited from relying on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR as a lawful basis for
processing of personal data with respect to its service. 11
c) Whether WhatsApp misrepresented the legal basis for processing in a manner that
caused the Complainant to believe the processing was based on consent. 12

Investigator’s final inquiry report, paragraph 90.
Ibid.
11
Ibid.
12
Ibid.
9

10

7

d) Whether WhatsApp failed to provide the necessary information regarding its legal basis
for processing in connection with its Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. 13
2.14

In the Preliminary Draft, I agreed with the Investigator’s summary of the core issues in respect of
issues (a) and (b). In respect of issues (c) and (d), however, I took a different view.

2.15

Issue (c), as identified by the Investigator, solely addresses the allegation that WhatsApp has
misrepresented the lawful basis relied on in connection with the Terms of Service. In the
Preliminary Draft, I agreed that this issue falls within the scope of the Complaint. Issue (d),
however, was treated by the Investigator as a generalised assessment of whether WhatsApp’s
Privacy Policy complies with Article 13(1)(c) GDPR as a whole with regard to processing conducted
on foot of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR. This is based on the fact that the Complaint states, in generalised
terms, that:
“It remains, nevertheless, unclear which exact processing operations the controller
chooses to base on each specific legal basis under Article 6 and Article 9 of the GDPR.
In its updated privacy policy, the controller simply lists all six bases for lawful processing
under Article 6 of the GDPR in its privacy policy without stating exactly which legal basis
the controller relies upon for each specific processing operation.” 14

2.16

It is on that basis that the Investigator interpreted the scope of the Complaint as comprising the
allegation that the Privacy Policy breaches Article 13(1)(c) GDPR. It is crucial, however, to view the
above quotation in the context of the subsequent statement, which says:
“In any case, the controller required the data subject to “agree” to the entire privacy policy
and to the new terms.
It is therefore impossible to determine, which exact processing operations are based on
each specific legal basis under Article 6 and 9 of the GDPR.
This leads to our preliminary assumption, that all processing operations described therein
are based on consent, or that the controller at least led the data subject to believe that all
these processing operations are (also) based on Article 6(1)(a) and/or 9(2)(a) of the
GDPR.” 15

2.17

I do not accept that the factual question of whether WhatsApp “misled” the data subject (i.e.
issue (c)) is a separate legal question from whether WhatsApp complied with its transparency

Ibid.
Complaint, paragraph 1.3.
15
Ibid.
13
14

8

obligations in the context of processing allegedly carried out pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) GDPR (i.e.
issue (d)). There is no distinct legal issue raised by the question whether, as a matter of fact, the
Complainant did or did not believe that the processing was based on Article 6(1)(a) GDPR (i.e.
consent) and not on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR (i.e. necessity for the performance of a contract). If
WhatsApp has breached its transparency obligations, it logically follows that the Complainant will
have been unlawfully “misled”, whether deliberately or otherwise. If WhatsApp has complied with
its transparency obligations, it cannot be the case that the Complainant was unlawfully misled.
On that basis, my view is that issues (c) and (d) are essentially concerned with the same issue.
WhatsApp expressed agreement with this analysis in its submissions on the Preliminary Draft of
this decision (“the Preliminary Draft”). 16
2.18

In its submissions on the draft inquiry report prepared by the Investigator (“the Draft Inquiry
Report), the Complainant’s representative submitted that the Commission “in no way
investigated why specific parts of the terms of service should be a contract” 17 and argued,
therefore, that the investigation is somehow incomplete. I expressed the view, in the Draft
Decision, that such an inquiry would be unnecessary in order to resolve the core issue in dispute
here, and would not divulge any new information or serve a useful purpose at this stage. As is set
out in Section 3, below, there is no dispute as to the existence of a contract between WhatsApp
and the Complainant or the fact that no consent within the meaning of the GDPR has been
provided by the Complainant in concluding the “agreement” in dispute. What is in dispute, as set
out in detail in this Decision and in Schedule 1, is the lawfulness of the personal data processing
and the transparency of the information provided.

2.19

Following the circulation of the Draft Decision to the supervisory authorities concerned for the
purpose of enabling them to express their views in accordance with Article 60(3) GDPR, the
supervisory authorities of Finland, France and Italy raised objections in relation to the
Commission’s assessment of the scope of the Complaint, as summarised above.
Having considered those objections, the EDPB determined, at paragraph 218 of the Article 65
Decision, that the inquiry underpinning this Decision ought to have included an examination
of “the legal basis for [WhatsApp’s] processing operations for the purposes of behavioural
advertising, the potential processing of special categories of personal data, applicable legal
basis for provision of metrics to third parties and the exchange of data with affiliated
companies for the purposes of service improvements, as well as the processing of personal data
for the purposes of marketing.” Accordingly, the EDPB directed, at paragraph 222 of the Article
65 Decision, the Commission to commence a new Inquiry into “WhatsApp IE’s processing
operations in its service in order to determine if it processes special categories of personal data
(Article 9 GDPR), processes data for the purposes of behavioural advertising, for marketing
purposes, as well as for the provision of metrics to third parties and the exchange of data with
affiliated companies for the purposes of service improvements, and in order to determine if it

WhatsApp submissions on the Preliminary Draft, paragraph 8.2.
Complainant submissions on Draft Inquiry Report, paragraph 3.1.2.

1616
17

9

complies with the relevant obligations under the GDPR.” While that direction cannot be
addressed by the Commission in this Decision, the Commission considers it necessary to note
the position, in light of the Commission’s assessment of the scope of the Complaint (as already
recorded above) and for the purpose of ensuring compliance with its obligation, pursuant to
Article 65(6) GDPR, to adopt its final decision on the basis of the Article 65 Decision.
2.20

On the basis of the above, the issues that I addressed in the Draft Decision were as follows:
•

Issue 1 – Whether clicking on the “accept” button constitutes or must be considered consent
for the purposes of the GDPR

•

Issue 2 – Reliance on Article 6(1)(b) as a lawful basis for personal data processing

•

Issue 3 – Whether WhatsApp provided the requisite information on the legal basis for
processing on foot of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR and whether it did so in a transparent manner.

2.21

The Draft Decision proposed a number of findings, by reference to the issues identified above.
The first of those findings proposed a determination that WhatsApp: (a) has not sought to rely on
consent in order to process personal data to deliver the Terms of Service, and (b) is not legally
obliged to rely on consent in order to do so (“Finding 1”). Finding 1, therefore, constituted a
proposal in the Draft Decision to dismiss/reject an aspect of the Complaint.

2.22

The Article 65 Decision does not contain any instruction or direction that would require (or
permit) the Commission to disturb proposed Finding 1. Accordingly, Finding 1 remains part of the
decision that fell to be adopted, following the conclusion of the Article 65 process. Article 60(9)
GDPR provides, in this regard, that:
“Where the lead supervisory authority and the supervisory authorities concerned agree to
dismiss or reject parts of a complaint and to act on other parts of that complaint, a
separate decision shall be adopted for each of those parts of the matter. The lead
supervisory authority shall adopt the decision for the part concerning actions in relation
to the controller or processor on the territory of its Member State and shall inform the
complainant thereof, while the supervisory authority of the complainant shall adopt the
decision for the part concerning dismissal or rejection of that complaint, and shall notify
it to that complainant and shall inform the controller or processor thereof.”

2.23

Given that Finding 1 represented the dismissal/rejection of part of the Complaint, it was necessary
for the Commission to remove the finding and its supporting analysis from this Decision prior to
its adoption in circumstances where Article 60(9) GDPR requires this to be adopted, by way of a
separate decision, by the supervisory authority of the Complainant (as identified in paragraph 1.2,
above).
10

2.24

Accordingly, the following is an analysis of Issues 2 and 3 (in circumstances where Issue 1 is the
subject of Finding 1 and has therefore been removed from this Decision prior to its adoption for
the reasons outlined above).

3

ISSUE 2 - RELIANCE ON 6(1)(B) AS A LAWFUL BASIS FOR PERSONAL DATA PROCESSING

3.1

As set out above, the Complainant contends that WhatsApp’s processing of personal data under
the Terms of Service must be based entirely on consent as a legal basis under the GDPR. I note
that there is no hierarchy of legal bases in the GDPR and there is nothing to support the contention
that the agreement in question must legally be based on consent. The Complainant’s argument
also rests on the contention that WhatsApp cannot rely on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR to process
personal data in order to perform the Terms of Service.

3.2

In considering this issue, I will first address the relationship between the Terms of Service and the
Privacy Policy. This assessment is necessary as the Complainant argues that she “agreed” to the
Privacy Policy by accepting WhatsApp’s updated Terms of Service. WhatsApp has argued that this
position is not correct. After coming to a conclusion on this matter, I will then consider the
substantive question of whether WhatsApp is entitled to rely on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR as a lawful
basis for the processing of personal data.

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE TERMS OF SERVICE AND PRIVACY POLICY
3.3

The Complainant alleges that in clicking the “accept” button, she agreed to both the Privacy Policy
and the Terms of Service and that the alleged non-compliance is compounded by such agreement
to both. In examining this aspect of the Complaint, the Investigator was of the view that that the
Privacy Policy was not a component of the data subject’s contract with WhatsApp. The
Investigator also acknowledged, in the final inquiry report (“the Final Inquiry Report”) that the
Complainant seems to have conceded that there is no “consent” and therefore no “agreement”
to the Privacy Policy. I have set this out in more detail above, with specific regard to the argument
that users were asked to “accept” both documents. The Investigator ultimately found that, given
the conditions for consent were not met, and given the contents of the Privacy Policy made clear
that any such “consent” to the Privacy Policy would be contradictory, this acceptance was not
consent.18

3.4

I note therefore the Investigator’s consideration of whether the Complainant was forced to
consent to all of the processing operations set out in the Privacy Policy. In the Draft Decision, I
expressed the view that the acceptance in question was not an act of consent but, on its terms,
constituted acceptance of a contract i.e. acceptance of the Terms of Service. Although the Privacy

18

Final Inquiry Report, paragraphs 180-182.

11

Policy was contained within the engagement flow, I am not satisfied that it was thereby
incorporated into the Terms of Service. WhatsApp has stated that it “agrees with the
Commission’s assessment in this regard”.19
3.5

The Privacy Policy is a document through which WhatsApp seeks to comply with particular
provisions of the GDPR in relation to transparency, whereas the Terms of Service is a contract.
WhatsApp relies on various legal bases for various data processing operations, some of which are
based on consent and some of which are based on contractual necessity. Where contractual
necessity is relied on, the contract in question is the Terms of Service. At this juncture, I am merely
expressing the view that the contract in question, and therefore the contract for which the
analysis based on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR must take place, is the Terms of Service only. The Privacy
Policy is only relevant insofar as it sheds light on the processing operations carried out for which
WhatsApp relies on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR. It is essentially an explanatory document. The extent to
which it does shed light on these processing operations, i.e. matters of transparency, are relevant
only to the next matter to be addressed in this Decision.

3.6

I also note that, while the Complaint refers to various examples of data processing, e.g.
advertising, it does not go so far as to directly link the Complaint to specific processing operations
by reference to an identifiable body of data with any great clarity or precision. In the
circumstances, I expressed the view, in the Draft Decision, that the issue surrounding Article
6(1)(b) GDPR in the Complaint ought to be considered at the level of principle, with my findings
to be made on that basis. The Privacy Policy itself references a very wide range of processing
operations. Within the framework of this Complaint, there has not been a high degree of
specificity in relation to individual processing operations complained of. I also note, as I have in
Schedule 1, that the Complainant’s representative sought to direct the Commission to conduct an
assessment of all processing operations carried out by WhatsApp. I have set out why, in my view,
it is not open to a complainant or their representative to demand such an activity. More generally,
I have also already indicated that, in my view, complaints should have a reasonable degree of
specificity.

3.7

The Complaint does, however, focus on a number of particular processing activities and has a
specific focus on data processed to facilitate improvements to services and advertising. This was
accordingly the focus of the Draft Decision. To ensure that this Inquiry has a reasonable degree of
specificity, the Draft Decision proposed to decide whether WhatsApp can, in principle, rely on
Article 6(1)(b) GDPR for processing under the contract, including and in particular in the context
of service improvements, providing metrics to third parties (such as companies within the same
group of companies), and advertising.

3.8

On the question of advertising, I expressed the view, in the Draft Decision, that no evidence has
been presented by the Complainant that WhatsApp processes personal data for the purpose of

19

WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 7.8.

12

advertising and relies on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR to do so. The Investigator correctly pointed out in
the Final Inquiry Report that “WhatsApp’s Terms of Service bear little resemblance to the examples
cited in the complaint of situations where Article 6(1)(b) does not apply”, 20 such as advertising and
sponsored content. Given the absence of such references in WhatsApp’s Terms of Service, and
the absence of evidence that such processing takes place, I agreed with the Investigator, in my
Draft Decision, that arguments relating to the applicability of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR to data
processing to facilitate advertising were not relevant to the within Inquiry. WhatsApp has stated
in its submissions on the Preliminary Draft that it “agrees with the Commission’s approach that
the issue of advertising is irrelevant to the Inquiry”. 21 As already noted at paragraph 2.19, above,
the EDPB disagreed with this view in the Article 65 Decision.
THE COMPLAINT, THE SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES ON THE FINAL INQUIRY REPORT, AND THE FINAL INQUIRY REPORT
3.9

The Complainant argues that WhatsApp is not entitled to rely on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, i.e.
contractual necessity, as a legal basis. The Complainant contends that WhatsApp could only rely
on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in respect of processing that is “strictly necessary” to perform the
contract, and that such processing must be linked to “core” functions of the contract. To support
this view, the Complainant relies on Opinion 06/2014 of the Article 29 Working Party which
recommended that “[t]he contractual necessity lawful basis must be interpreted strictly and does
not cover situations where the processing is not genuinely necessary for the performance of a
contract, but rather unilaterally imposed on the data subject by the controller”. 22

3.10

Specifically, the Complainant argues that instant messaging and video calls constitute a “core”
element of WhatsApp’s contract, but data collected to facilitate improvements to services do not.
The Complainant’s position is premised on the idea that there is an identifiable “purpose” or
“core” of each contract which is discernible by reference to the contract as a whole and the
intention of the parties (as opposed to being strictly limited to the text of the contract). The
Complainant is therefore asking that an assessment of the Terms of Service be carried out to
determine what the “core” purpose of the contract is. It would follow from the Complainant’s
position that any processing that is not strictly necessary to fulfil these “core” purposes or
objectives, cannot be carried out on foot of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR.

3.11

As a preliminary matter, I emphasise my view that issues of interpretation and validity of national
contract law are not directly within the Commission’s competence. Nonetheless, it is important
to note that the legal concept of a “purpose” or “core” of a contract is one more often found in
civil law jurisdictions. The Commission’s role is in any event limited to interpreting and applying

Final Inquiry Report, paragraph 226.
WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 7.5.
22
Opinion 06/2014 on the notion of legitimate interests of the data controller under Article 7 of Directive
95/46/EC, page 16, https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinionrecommendation/files/2014/wp217_en.pdf.
20
21

13

the GDPR and, in interpreting and applying Article 6(1)(b) GDPR specifically, it must always be
borne in mind that the Commission is not competent to rule directly on matters of national
contract law or to determine questions of the general validity of a contract.
3.12

I note that the Complainant also explicitly sought to have the Commission investigate and make
findings in respect of contract and consumer law. I agree with the position of the Investigator that
this falls outside the remit of a supervisory authority under the GDPR. I further note that the
Investigator correctly drew the Complainant’s attention to the relevant Irish and German
consumer and competition authorities, which have competence in this regard. It seems to me that
these legal regimes would be a more appropriate avenue for the Complainant to ventilate the
issues surrounding contract law referred to above.

3.13

The Complainant argues that the “Our Services” section of the Terms of Service “often reads more
like a description and similar to an advertising brochure or a data protection declaration in the
meaning of Article 13 or 14 GDPR.”. 23 The Complainant also argues that showing any user
advertisements is a “purely factual” rather than a contractual obligation or duty. 24 In addition, the
Complainant’s argument endeavours to draw a distinction between “implicit consent” – i.e. some
form of agreement that is implicit or obvious within a contract for services – and “the part of the
contract that is objectively to be regarded as circumvention of consent” – i.e. consent which is
made contingent on the acceptance of a contract. 25 Applying the narrow interpretation of Article
6(1)(b) GDPR that is proposed by the Complainant, the argument is that the processing required
to deliver the “factual” services set out in the contract cannot fall within Article 6(1)(b) GDPR. This
rests on the aforementioned distinction drawn by the Complainant between processing that is
strictly necessary to deliver the “core” objectives of the service i.e. providing a messaging service,
and factual events simply mentioned or described in the contract i.e. using data to improve a
service.

3.14

The remaining argument is that the “take it or leave it” approach to signing up or continuing to
use WhatsApp in any event does not constitute processing that is permitted by Article 6(1)(b)
GDPR. To assess whether this interpretation of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR is correct, I must first consider
whether the processing which is carried out on foot of the acceptance of the contract is necessary
to perform that contract. In essence, this requires an assessment of whether the services offered
by WhatsApp pursuant to the contract are necessary to fulfil the contract’s core functions.

3.15

In advancing the argument that Article 6(1)(b) GDPR can only be relied on to legitimise data
processing that constitutes “a core element” of the service, 26 the Complainant relies on guidance

The Complainant’s submissions on Draft Inquiry Report, paragraph 3.1.1.2.
Ibid, paragraph 3.1.3.
25
Ibid, Paragraph 4.4.3.6.
26
Complaint, paragraph 1.3.
23
24

14

of the EDPB. Moreover, the Complainant argues that, inter alia, WhatsApp has made a “ridiculous
argument” in arguing that a user can “agree” to data processing for Terms of Service that primarily
involve the processing of data. 27
3.16

The Complainant is therefore of the view that this particular interpretation should be applied to
the circumstances of the Complaint by conducting an assessment as to what constitutes the
“core” of the contract between the user and WhatsApp. The argument is that any services (such
as, in the Complainant’s view, improvements) which do not form part of the activities which are
strictly necessary to fulfil the core objective of the contract cannot be rendered lawful by Article
6(1)(b) GDPR.

3.17

Put very simply, the Complainant is advancing a narrow and purpose-based interpretation of
Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, that argues that the data processing should be the least invasive processing
possible in order to fulfil the objective of the contract (here, what the overall contract sets out to
do, rather than only what the contract says). In contrast, WhatsApp is advancing a broader
interpretation that facilitates a certain degree of contractual freedom in relation to how broad
the data processing might be, provided that the processing is in fact necessary to perform a term
of the specific contract.

3.18

WhatsApp argues that there is no basis to contend that WhatsApp, in clearly relying on a contract
with the user, has attempted to mislead the user and to “infer” consent from a user. WhatsApp’s
position is that the condition of necessity for contractual performance in “Article 6(1)(b) GDPR
does not mean that processing must be strictly essential to the performance of the contract, or
the only way to perform the underlying contract.”. 28 WhatsApp emphasises that, rather than being
required to use the most minimal processing possible in order to perform the contract,
contractual freedom must allow the parties to exercise a certain element of agency in coming to
an agreement, even where that agreement might involve the delivery of a service primarily using
data processing. WhatsApp’s position is therefore that the Complainant’s interpretation (and
proposed application) of the GDPR is incorrect and excessively narrow. It referred to and relied
on these submissions in its submissions on the Preliminary Draft. 29

3.19

WhatsApp also argues that there is an absence of meaningful rationale in the Complaint as to why
any of the elements of its service described in Section 1 of its Terms of Service cannot be based
on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR. It submits that “the processing which is necessary to perform the full
agreement entered into between the parties can include optional or conditional elements of
contract and this is a matter for the parties to the contract”.30 WhatsApp’s position is that the
Commission should apply a broader interpretation of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, such that processing

Complainant submissions on Draft Inquiry Report, paragraph 4.3.
WhatsApp submissions on Draft Inquiry Report, paragraph 4.2.
29
WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 7.10.
30
WhatsApp submissions on Draft Inquiry Report 29 July 2019, paragraph 4.3.
27
28

15

that is necessary to deliver a contract can be lawful irrespective of whether the specific processing
is essential, or the most minimal way, to deliver the service. In its submissions on the Preliminary
Draft, WhatsApp once again emphasised its position that processing that is necessary for the
performance of a contract “does not mean that processing must be essential to the performance
of the contract or the only way to perform the underlying contract.” 31
3.20

The Investigator acknowledged the difficulties in interpreting contractual necessity in vacuo,
where there is limited harmonisation of contract law at European level and where the Commission
is not competent to rule on matters of contract law. 32 The Investigator expressed particular
doubts about applying a test based on what is necessary to fulfil the core functions/objectives of
a contract given the lack of certainty surrounding it. 33 The Investigator concluded that the concept
of necessity in Article 6(1)(b) GDPR “includes processing which is necessary to perform the full
agreement entered into between the parties, including optional or conditional elements of
contract”. 34

3.21

The Investigator’s position is in contrast to that of the Complainant, which is that “necessity”
should be assessed strictly by reference to its meaning as an element in the proportionality test
in applying Article 52(1) of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms (“the
Charter”), i.e. that the measure be strictly necessary in order to fulfil the objective.

WHETHER WHATSAPP CAN RELY ON ARTICLE 6(1)(B) GDPR
3.22

In coming to a conclusion on this matter in the Preliminary Draft, I had regard to the Guidelines
of the EDPB on processing for online services based on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR; while these
Guidelines are not strictly binding, there are nonetheless instructive in considering this issue. The
Guidelines state in clear terms that “the processing in question must be objectively necessary for
the performance of a contract with a data subject”. 35 In my view, this turns on a consideration of
what is meant by the concepts of “performance, “necessity” and “contract”, as understood in the
context of data protection law.

3.23

It is, in the Commission’s view, important to have regard not just to the concept of what is
“necessary”, but also to the concept of “performance”. The EDPB has set out that controller
should ensure “that processing is necessary in order that the particular contract with the data
subject can be performed.” 36 A contract is performed when each party discharges their

WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 7.10.
Final Inquiry Report, paragraph 223.
33
Ibid.
34
Ibid, paragraph 224.
35
Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of
online services to data subjects https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines-art_6-1-badopted_after_public_consultation_en.pdf, paragraph 22.
36
Ibid, paragraph 26.
31
32

16

contractual obligations as has been agreed by reference to the bargain struck between the
parties. It follows that what is “necessary” for the performance of a contract is anything that, if it
did not take place, would mean the specific contract had not been performed. In this regard, I
note that the mere inclusion of a term in a contract does not necessarily mean that it is necessary
to perform the particular contract. This understanding is consistent with the EDPB Guidance which
states that the processing will be necessary for the performance of a contract if “the main subjectmatter of the specific contract with the data subject cannot, as a matter of fact, be performed if
the specific processing of the personal data in question does not occur”. 37 It remains the view of
the Commission, however, that necessity cannot be considered entirely in the abstract, and
regard must be had for what is necessary for the performance of the specific contract freely
entered into by the parties.
3.24

The EDPB states that there is:
“…a distinction between processing activities necessary for the performance of a contract,
and terms making the service conditional on certain processing activities that are not in
fact necessary for the performance of the contract. ‘Necessary for performance’ clearly
requires something more than a contractual condition” [my emphasis]. 38

3.25

The Guidelines also set out that controller should:
“demonstrate how the main object of the specific contract with the data subject cannot,
as a matter of fact, be performed if the specific processing of the personal data in question
does not occur. The important issue here is the nexus between the personal data and
processing operations concerned, and the performance or non-performance of the service
provided under the contract.” 39

3.26

On the question of necessity, I note that the EDPB has stated that the meaning of necessity as
understood in EU law must be considered when having regard to a provision of EU law, including
data protection law. 40 This is an uncontroversial statement. I also note that in Heinz Huber v
Bundesrepublik Deutschland, the CJEU held in the context of Directive 95/46 that necessity is an
existing principle of EU law that must be interpreted in a manner that “reflects the objective of
that directive”. 41 It is important to highlight, as the Investigator has, 42 that in the same case the
CJEU held that processing beyond the most minimal to meet the objective will still meet the

Ibid, paragraph 30.
Guidelines 2/2019, paragraph 27.
39
Ibid, paragraph 30.
40
Ibid, paragraph 23.
41
Case C‑524/06, Heinz Huber v Bundesrepublik Deutschland, 18 December.
2008, para. 52.
42
Final Inquiry Report, paragraph 202(vi).
37
38

17

necessity test if it renders a lawful objective “more effective”.43 However, the EDPB proposes clear
limits to this by stating “merely referencing or mentioning data processing in a contract is not
enough to bring the processing in question within the scope of Article 6(1)(b).” 44
3.27

The EDPB Guidelines assess necessity by reference to the “core” function of the contract. This is
supportive of the Complainant’s position that the “core” functions of a contract must be assessed
in order to determine what processing is objectively necessary in order to perform it. I agree with
this assessment for the reasons set out by the EDPB. In this vein, I would add that the
Commission’s view is that necessity is to be determined by reference to the particular contract as
between the parties. Indeed, the question to be asked is whether the processing operation(s)
is/are is necessary to fulfil the “specific” 45 or “particular” 46 contract with the data subject. This is
the view taken by the EDPB and, as Article 6(1)(b) GDPR clearly refers to the specific contract
between a data controller and a data subject, I am in agreement with the EDPB in this regard.

3.28

WhatsApp submitted, in response to the Preliminary Draft, that necessity should be determined
not in a general sense but based on an assessment of the contract itself. It also adds that “the
Core Functions Assessment is fully consistent with broader data protection principles…beyond
simply considering if the relevant processing is referenced in the terms of the contract, but instead
assesses whether that processing is integral to delivering the contractual service”. 47 It is therefore
in agreement with an assessment of a contract in the manner proposed. The Complainant made
no further submissions in this regard in response to the Preliminary Draft.

3.29

In accordance with the EDPB Guidelines, and as set out in WhatsApp’s submissions referred to
above, the processing in question must be more than simply the processing of personal data
which is referenced in the terms of the contract. Rather, it must be necessary in order to fulfil the
clearly stated and understood objectives or “core” of the contract. The “core functions” cannot,
however, in the Commission’s view, be considered in isolation from the meaning of
“performance”, the meaning of “necessity” as set out above, and the content of the specific
contract in question. The question is therefore not what is necessary to fulfil the objectives of
“messaging service” in a general sense, but what is necessary to fulfil the core functions of the
particular contract between WhatsApp and WhatsApp users. In order to carry out this
assessment, it is therefore necessary to consider the contract itself.

Huber v Deutschland, paragraph 62.
Guidelines 2/2019, paragraph 27.
45
Ibid, paragraph 30.
46
Ibid, paragraph 26.
47
WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 7.13.
43
44

18

3.30

I recall my earlier statement that matters of national contract law are outside the scope of the
Commission. 48 Nonetheless, for the purposes of data protection law, I note that the EDPB
indicates that, in such an assessment, “regard should be given to the particular aim, purpose, or
objective of the service”. 49 In my view, when examining what constitutes a “contract” for the
purposes of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, the term “contract” does not necessarily refer to the entirety of
the (written) agreement between the parties. Rather, I agree that the correct approach is to
examine the actual bargain which has been struck between the parties and determine the core
function of the contract by reference to this. Therefore, the inclusion of a term which does not
relate to the core function of the contract could not be considered necessary for its performance.

3.31

As an aid to deciding whether Article 6(1)(b) GDPR is an appropriate lawful basis, and in particular
in considering the scope of the relevant contract, the EDPB suggests asking:
•
•
•
•
•

“What is the nature of the service being provided to the data subject?
What are its distinguishing characteristics? What is the exact rationale of the contract
(i.e. its substance and fundamental object)?
What are the essential elements of the contract?
What are the mutual perspectives and expectations of the parties to the contract?
How is the service promoted or advertised to the data subject? Would an ordinary
user of the service reasonably expect?” 50

3.32

In considering this particular issue in the context of the Complaint, it is necessary to identify the
“core” functions of the contract between WhatsApp and WhatsApp users. At this point, I note
that the Complaint itself does not specify, with any great precision, the extent of the processing
(or indeed the processing operation(s)) that the Complainant believes to not be necessary to
perform the Terms of Service. The Complainant has however made some specific submissions
arguing processing for service improvement, security, “exchange of data with affiliated
companies” and the processing of special category data is not necessary in order to fulfil the “core
function” of a messaging and calling service. As a result, I focused on this processing in the
Preliminary Draft, and retain this focus in this section of this Decision.

3.33

In the Schedule to the Draft Decision, I expressed the view that there was no evidence to support
the assertion that WhatsApp is processing data that facilitates the inferring of special categories
of data and, therefore, that was not taking place or relevant to the herein Complaint and Inquiry.

In this regard, I also note that national contract law of individual Member States applies various standards to
determine when a contract will be deemed to be performed, what contractual terms can be breached without the
entire contract being deemed to be breached, and indeed how something can be deemed a “term” in the first place.
49
Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of
online services to data subjects https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines-art_6-1-badopted_after_public_consultation_en.pdf, paragraph 30.
50
Ibid, paragraph 33.
48

19

Moreover, I expressed the view that it was clear from the Terms of Service that any sharing with
affiliated companies formed part of the general “improvements” that are carried out pursuant to
Article 6(1)(b) GDPR and so, in reality, any clear delineation between these two forms of
processing was artificial. I also noted, in this regard, WhatsApp’s position that any “sharing of
WhatsApp user data to Meta Companies takes place on a controller to processor basis only, there
does not need to be a distinct legal basis supporting it (or assessment of this issue in the Inquiry).” 51
3.34

WhatsApp’s Terms of Service states that:
“Ways To Improve Our Services. We analyze how you make use of WhatsApp, in order to
improve all aspects of our Services described here, including helping businesses who use
WhatsApp measure the effectiveness and distribution of their services and messages.
WhatsApp uses the information it has and also works with partners, service providers, and
affiliated companies to do this.”

3.35

It further states that:
“Safety And Security. We work to protect the safety and security of WhatsApp by
appropriately dealing with abusive people and activity and violations of our Terms. We
prohibit misuse of our Services, harmful conduct towards others, and violations of our
Terms and policies, and address situations where we may be able to help support or
protect our community. We develop automated systems to improve our ability to detect
and remove abusive people and activity that may harm our community and the safety and
security of our Services. If we learn of people or activity like this, we will take appropriate
action by removing such people or activity or contacting law enforcement. We share
information with other affiliated companies when we learn of misuse or harmful conduct
by someone using our Services.”

3.36

51

The Complainant however argues that such improvements and security features referenced in
these terms, and any associated sharing of data with other Meta Companies (then Facebook
Companies), is not necessary in order to deliver a messaging service, and that simply placing these
terms in the contract does not make them necessary. Both of these statements may be true but,
as noted in the Draft Decision, it does not follow that fulfilling these terms is not necessary in
order to fulfil the specific contract with WhatsApp. To do that, to use the language of the EDPB,
it is necessary to consider “the nature of the service being offered to the data subject”. In the Draft
Decision, I expressed the view that WhatsApp’s improvement through utilising metrics gleaned
from data, as well as the contractual commitment to deal with abusive activity, marks out

WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 7.9(B).

20

“distinguishing characteristics” (to use the language of the EDPB). 52 I further expressed the view
that the WhatsApp service is clearly “promoted [and] advertised”, 53 via the Terms of Service as be
one that provides both regular updates and improvements through use of data and one that has
particular policies for dealing with abuse. I therefore expressed the view, in the Draft Decision,
that a reasonable user would be well-informed that this is precisely the nature of the service being
offered by WhatsApp and contained within the contract. WhatsApp expressed agreement with
this position. 54 I further indicated that this is true irrespective of any transparency deficiencies
raised in the Complaint, including some found by the Commission in a previous Inquiry into
WhatsApp’s Privacy Policy.
3.37

However, the position of the Complainant, and of the EDPB, seems to go so far as to say that
processing will generally only be necessary for the performance of the contract if not carrying out
the processing would make the performance of the contract impossible. Moreover, the position
of the EDPB is that:
“The EDPB does not consider that Article 6(1)(b) would generally be an appropriate lawful
basis for processing for the purposes of improving a service or developing new functions
within an existing service. In most cases, a user enters into a contract to avail of an existing
service. While the possibility of improvements and modifications to a service may routinely
be included in contractual terms, such processing usually cannot be regarded as being
objectively necessary for the performance of the contract with the user.” 55

3.38

The EDPB has also opined that processing for fraud prevention is unlikely to be necessary to
perform a contract. 56

3.39

The Guidelines, while not binding on the Commission, in my view clearly set out a very restrictive
view on when processing should be deemed to be “necessary” for the performance of a contract,
and explicitly refer to improvements to services as an example of processing that will usually not
be necessary. It is notable that this is presented as a general rather than absolute rule, and refers
to an “existing” service and the development of new functions. There is nothing contained in the
Guidelines that would explicitly prohibit, in general, the processing of data that is necessary to
fulfil a contractual term that commits to improving the functionality, efficiency, etc. of an existing

Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of
online services to data subjects https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines-art_6-1-badopted_after_public_consultation_en.pdf, paragraph 33.
53
Ibid.
54
WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraphs 7.14-7.15.
55
Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of
online services to data subjects https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines-art_6-1-badopted_after_public_consultation_en.pdf, paragraph 46.
56
Ibid, paragraph 47.
52

21

service, as opposed to collecting data for the purpose of adding new features. Given the
processing outlined in the Terms of Service relates to the former, I expressed the view, in the
Draft Decision, that it falls outside of the scenario referred to by the EDPB. WhatsApp has
expressed agreement with this point in its submissions on the Preliminary Draft. 57
3.40

In the Draft Decision, I expressed the view that the core area of dispute in applying Article 6(1)(b)
GDPR on the facts was the question of whether the inclusion of service improvements and
security, including through sharing data with another company, makes the processing of data
conditional on the delivery of a contract, where that processing is not itself necessary to actually
deliver the contract. The counter-argument is that these core elements of the specific service
being offered are necessary to provide the WhatsApp service.

3.41

Applying the standards set out above to these particular circumstances, it seemed to me, when
preparing the Draft Decision, that WhatsApp’s model and the service being offered is explicitly
one that includes improvements to an existing service, and a commitment to uphold certain
standards relating to abuse, etc., that is common across all affiliated platforms. The EDPB has, of
course, set out that processing cannot be rendered lawful by Article 6(1)(b) GDPR “simply because
processing is necessary for the controller’s wider business model”. 58 In my view, the core of the
service, however, as set out in the specific contract with the data subject, clearly includes these
services. Moreover, there has been no suggestion that the utilisation of such data for these
services is somehow a requirement that is specific to a commercial model, but rather is a term of
a service being offered to users. When the surrounding principles are applied directly to the
contract in question, I expressed the view, in the Preliminary Draft, that such processing is
necessary to deliver the service being offered. WhatsApp has emphasised in its submissions on
the Preliminary Draft that the processing in question can be distinguished from the EDPB
Guidelines on this basis. 59

3.42

Further support for this particular view can be found in the answers to the specific questions
posed in the EDPB Guidelines and set out at paragraph 3.36, above. The nature of the service
being offered to WhatsApp users is set out in the Terms of Service, as I have already addressed.
Moreover, a distinguishing feature of the WhatsApp service is that it regularly monitors its service
in order to ensure it functions well (as distinct from the EDPB’s difficulty, in the Guidelines, with
using data to bring about new services) and maintains certain security and abuse standards. The
provision of this form of service is, in my view, part of the substance and fundamental object of
the contract. As this information is both clearly set out and publicly available, I expressed the view,
in the Draft Decision, that it would be difficult to argue that this is not part of the mutual

WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 7.19.
Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of
online services to data subjects https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines-art_6-1-badopted_after_public_consultation_en.pdf, paragraph 36.
59
WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 7.20.
57
58

22

expectations of a prospective user and of WhatsApp. I further expressed the view that it was clear
that the service is advertised as being one that has these features, and so any reasonable user
would expect and understand that this was part of the agreement, even if they would prefer the
market would offer them better alternative choices. I was therefore satisfied that the answers to
all of the questions proposed by the EDPB suggest that the Complainant’s application of Article
6(1)(b) GDPR on the facts is inaccurate, and that nothing in the Guidelines prevent WhatsApp, in
principle, from relying on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR for these purposes.
3.43

Finally I note that the Complainant has sought to rely on a Gallup poll, that suggests that the
majority of users when agreeing to use Facebook (as opposed to WhatsApp) believed they were
consenting to data processing rather than entering into a contract. The Complainant argues that
it can be extrapolated that the situation in respect of WhatsApp is similar. 60 While no evidence
for this has been presented, I was, in any event, not satisfied that such subjective impressions
have any impact on whether a document is or is not a contract. Moreover, I was of the view, in
the Draft Decision, that it certainly has no impact on the question of whether, in principle, a data
controller may rely on a particular provision of Article 6 GDPR in order to legitimise particular
forms of processing.

3.44

I have already pointed out my view that the Guidelines are non-binding. I was minded,
nonetheless, in the Draft Decision, to agree with the arguments of both the Complainant and the
EDPB in relation to the correct interpretation of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR. For the reasons set out
above, my view was that nothing in the Complainant’s submissions, the GDPR, the case law or the
EDPB Guidelines suggest that the specific processing at issue, for the specific service being offered
by WhatsApp, could not, in principle, be legitimised by Article 6(1)(b) GDPR.

3.45

While I accept that this assessment requires an element of reasoning in the abstract (in particular,
when considering the mutual perspectives and expectations), I would add that the “core
functions” assessment is more sensitive to the (potentially competing) rights of both parties,
including WhatsApp’s right to conduct a business pursuant to Article 16 of the Charter of
Fundamental Rights and Freedoms (and freedom of contract generally). I am also of the view that
it is not for an authority such as the Commission, tasked with the enforcement of data protection
law, to make assessments as to what will or will not make the performance of a contract possible
or impossible. Instead, the general principles set out in the GDPR and explained by the EDPB in
the Guidelines must be applied. These principles should be applied on a case-by-case basis, and
in my view should be afforded more weight than generalised examples provided in the Guidelines,
which are helpful and instructive but are by no means absolute or conclusive.

3.46

While WhatsApp has expressed agreement in general with the above analysis, 61 it also argues that
even if the Commission were to apply what it terms “the Impossibility Assessment” (which it

60
61

Complainant submissions on Draft Inquiry Report, paragraph 3.3.1.
WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, Paragraph 7.16.

23

nonetheless argues is the incorrect test), the processing would be permissible in principle. It
submits that given the particular service being offered and advertised in a certain manner and the
reasonable expectations of ordinary users, the processing associated with service improvements
is in fact necessary, such that the performance of the contract would be rendered impossible if it
was not carried out. 62
3.47

In the Draft Decision, I expressed the view that nothing precludes WhatsApp from relying on
Article 6(1)(b) GDPR to deliver a service that includes the use of personal data for regular
improvements and maintaining standards of security. Moreover, other provisions of the GDPR
(such as transparency, which I consider at Issue 3, below) act to strictly regulate the manner in
which this service is to be delivered, and the information that should be given to users.

3.48

Having analysed the submissions of the parties, the GDPR and the jurisprudence and Guidelines
(with the caveats set out above), I found no basis, in the Draft Decision, for the contention that
WhatsApp is precluded, in principle, from relying on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR for the purposes of
legitimising the personal data processing activities involved in the provision of its service to users,
including those considered herein. I expressed the view that nothing in the GDPR restricts or
prohibits the use of these terms in the context of processing personal data per se. As has been set
out earlier, and as set out by the Investigator, it is not for the Commission to rule on matters of
contract law and contractual interpretation that extend beyond the remit of data protection law.
The lawful basis under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR simply states that personal data may be processed
where it is necessary for the performance of a contract. In other words and, as I have already set
out in my analysis, the data may be processed if, without that processing, the contract would not
be performed. I also expressed the view, in the Draft Decision, that this application conforms
broadly to the interpretation of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR proposed by the Complainant and by the
EDPB.

3.49

While I accept that, as a general rule, the EPDB considers that processing for the provision of new
services, or the prevention of fraud, would not be necessary for the performance of a contract for
online services, in this particular case, having regard to the specific terms of the contract and the
nature of the service provided and agreed upon by the parties, I concluded in the Draft Decision
that WhatsApp may, in principle, rely on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR for the processing of users’ data
that is necessary for the provision of its service, including through the improvement of the existing
service and the maintenance of security standards. As already noted above, the Complainant did
not provide submissions on this or any issue in response to the Preliminary Draft.

3.50

I proposed to conclude, in the Draft Decision, that I was therefore satisfied that WhatsApp was,
in principle, entitled to rely on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR for processing personal data on foot of the
Complainant’s acceptance of the Terms of Service. Having regard to the scope of the Complaint
and this Inquiry, I added that this proposed conclusion was not to be construed as an indication

62

Ibid, paragraph 7.17.

24

that all processing operations carried out on users’ personal data were necessarily covered by
Article 6(1)(b) GDPR.
3.51

Following the circulation of the Draft Decision to the supervisory authorities concerned, for the
purpose of enabling them to express their views in accordance with Article 60(3) GDPR, objections
to this aspect of matters were raised by the supervisory authorities of Germany, Finland, France,
the Netherlands and Norway. Having considered the merits of those objections, the EDPB
determined as follows:
90. As a preliminary remark, the EDPB notes, as observed by the NL SA, that the purposes are
vague, especially the one on “safety and security”, mentioned by WhatsApp IE in its Terms
of Service. The EDPB understands from the short description provided under the relevant
section of WhatsApp IE's Terms of Service that it refers to “misuse” of WhatsApp services,
“harmful conduct”, and activities that would violate WhatsApp IE’s Terms of Service. In
its Draft Decision, the IE SA considered that the Complainant did not identify particular
processing operations with any degree of specificity, and that complaints should in
general have a reasonable degree of specificity, and, hence addressed the issue of Article
6(1)(b) GDPR in principle. In doing so, the Draft Decision refers to various terms: “abusive
activity” (which is referred to in WhatsApp IE’s Terms of Service) 63, “fraud” 64 and
“security” without further description65 (which is referred to in WhatsApp IE’s Terms of
Service), which do not bring clarity and/or more specificity on this purpose. Based on
these elements, and considering that WhatsApp IE’s Terms of Service refer to another
purpose of processing than the security carried out by technical and organisational
measures in order to secure the processing of personal data, networks and services or
processing to which WhatsApp IE is entitled or obliged under other legal provisions (e.g.
technical and organisational measures applied to protect personal data, for instance as
required under Article 32 GDPR 66), the EDPB is excluding “IT Security” from its assessment
of the merits hereinafter. On a similar note, the EDPB highlights that when the purpose
of the processing is “IT Security”, for instance in the meaning of Article 32 GDPR, the
purpose of the processing has to be clearly and specifically identified by the controller 67.
91. The EDPB considers that the objections found to be relevant and reasoned in this
subsection68 require an assessment of whether the Draft Decision needs to be changed
insofar as it rejects the Complainant’s claim that the GDPR does not permit WhatsApp IE’s
reliance on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR for the processing operations set out in its Terms of

Draft Decision, paragraphs 4.36, 4.41, 4.42.
Draft Decision, paragraphs 4.38 and 4.49.
65
Draft Decision, paragraphs 4.40, 4.42, 4.47, 4.49.
66
WhatsApp IE may also fall under legal duties to protect the security of its networks and services, as required by other
laws. See for instance Article 40 of the European Electronic Communications Code established under Directive (EU)
2018/1972 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018.
67
See Guidelines 2/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraph 16.
68
Objections concerning the issue on the applicability of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR for purposes of service improvement
and security features were raised by the DE SA, FI SA, FR SA, NL SA, and NO SA.
63
64

25

Service. When assessing the merits of the objections raised, the EDPB also takes into
account WhatsApp IE’s position on the objections and its submissions.
92. The CSAs seek in essence to establish whether Article 6(1)(b) GDPR could serve as a valid
legal basis for the processing of personal data at issue, namely for service improvements
and security features, in the specific case and to establish whether there is an
infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR.
93. The CJEU has found that so far as concerns the principles relating to lawfulness of
processing, Article 6 GDPR sets out an exhaustive and restrictive list of the cases in which
processing of personal data can be regarded as lawful. Thus, in order to be considered
lawful, processing must fall within one of the cases provided for in Article 6 GDPR 69 and
it is the controller’s obligation to provide and to be able to prove that the correct legal
basis is applied for the respective processing.
94. The EDPB considers that there is sufficient information in the file for it to decide whether
the IE SA needs to change its Draft Decision insofar as it rejects the Complainant’s claim
that the GDPR does not permit WhatsApp IE’s reliance on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR to process
personal data in the context of its offering of its Terms of Service.
95. As described above, in Section 4.3, the IE SA concludes in Finding 2 of its Draft Decision
that the Complainant’s case is not made out that the GDPR does not permit the reliance
by WhatsApp IE on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the latter offering its Terms of
Service. Neither Article 6(1)(b) GDPR nor any other provision of the GDPR precludes
WhatsApp IE from relying on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR as a legal basis to deliver a service,
including the improvement of the existing service and the maintenance of security
standards insofar as that forms a core part of the service 70. The IE SA considers that,
having regard to the specific terms of the contract and the nature of the service provided
and agreed upon by the parties, WhatsApp IE may in principle rely on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR
as a legal basis of the processing of users’ data necessary for the provision of its WhatsApp
services, on foot of the Complainant’s acceptance of the Terms of Service 71. The IE SA
considers that this information is clearly set out, publicly available and understandable by
any reasonable user 72. WhatsApp IE supports the IE SA’s conclusion73.
96. To assess the IE SA and WhatsApp IE’s claims, the EDPB considers it necessary to recall
the general objectives that the GDPR pursues, which must guide its interpretation,
together with the wording of its provisions and its normative context 74.

Judgment of 11 December 2019, Asociaţia de Proprietari bloc M5A-ScaraA, C-708/18, EU:C:2019:1064, paragraphs
37 and 38.
70
Draft Decision, paragraph 4.49.
71
Draft Decision, paragraph 4.50.
72
Draft Decision, paragraph 4.42.
73
WhatsApp IE’s Article 65 Submission, paragraphs 5.47.
74
Judgment of 1 August 2022, Vyriausioji tarnybinės etikos komisija, C-184/20, ), EU:C:2022:601, paragraph 121.
69

26

97. The GDPR develops the fundamental right to the protection of personal data found in
Article 8(1) of the EU Charter and Article 16(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU,
which constitute EU primary law 75. As the CJEU clarified, ”an EU act must be interpreted,
as far as possible, in such a way as not to affect its validity and in conformity with primary
law as a whole and, in particular, with the provisions of the Charter. Thus, if the wording
of secondary EU legislation is open to more than one interpretation, preference should be
given to the interpretation which renders the provision consistent with primary law rather
than to the interpretation which leads to its being incompatible with primary law” 76. In
view of rapid technological developments and increases in the scale of data collection and
sharing, the GDPR creates a strong and more coherent data protection framework in the
EU, backed by strong enforcement, and built on the principle that natural persons should
have control over their own personal data 77. By ensuring a consistent, homogenous and
equivalent high level of protection throughout the EU, the GDPR seeks to ensure the free
movement of personal data within the EU 78. The GDPR acknowledges that the right to
data protection needs to be balanced against other fundamental rights and freedoms,
such as the freedom to conduct a business, in accordance with the principle of
proportionality 79 and has these considerations integrated into its provisions. The GDPR,
pursuant to EU primary law, treats personal data as a fundamental right inherent to data
subjects and their dignity, and not as a commodity, they can trade away through a
contract 80. The CJEU provided additional interpretative guidance by asserting that the
fundamental rights of data subjects to privacy and the protection of their personal data
override, as a rule, a controller’s economic interests 81.
98. The principle of lawfulness under Article 5(1)(a) and Article 6 GDPR is one of the main
safeguards to the protection of personal data. It follows a restrictive approach whereby a
controller may only process the personal data of individuals if it is able to rely on one of
the basis found in the exhaustive and restrictive lists of the cases in which the processing
of data is lawful under Article 6 GDPR 82.
99. The principle of lawfulness goes hand in hand with the principles of fairness and
transparency in Article 5(1)(a) GDPR. The principle of fairness includes, inter alia,
recognising the reasonable expectations of data subjects, considering possible adverse
consequences a processing may have on them, and having regard to the relationship and
potential effects of imbalance between them and the controller 83.

Recitals 1 and 2 GDPR.
Judgment of 21 June 2022, Ligue des droits humains v. Conseil des ministres, C-817/19, , EU:C:2022:491, paragraph
86; and judgment of 2 February 2021, Consob, C-481/19, EU:C:2021:84, paragraph 50 and the case- law cited.
77
Article 1(1)(2) and recital 6 and 7 GDPR.
78
Article 1(3) and recitals 9, 10 and 13 GDPR.
79
Recital 4 GDPR.
80
Guidelines 2/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraph 54.
81
Judgment of 13 May 2014, Google Spain SL, C-131/12, EU:C:2014:317, paragraphs 97 and 99.
82
Judgment of 11 December 2019, TK v Asociaţia de Proprietari bloc M5A-ScaraA, C-708/18, EU:C:2019:1064, paragraph
37.
83
See, recital 39 GDPR and Guidelines 2/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraphs 11 and 12.
75
76

27

100. The EDPB agrees with the IE SA and WhatsApp IE that there is no hierarchy between
Article 6(1) legal bases 84. However, this does not mean that a controller, as WhatsApp IE
in the present case, has absolute discretion to choose the legal basis that suits better its
commercial interests. The controller may only rely on one of the legal bases established
under Article 6 GDPR if it is appropriate for the processing in question85. A specific legal
basis will be appropriate insofar as the processing can meet its requirements set by the
GDPR 86 and fulfil the objective of the GDPR to protect the fundamental rights and
freedoms of natural persons and in particular their right to the protection of personal
data. A legal basis will not be appropriate if its application to a specific processing defeats
this practical effect “effet utile” pursued by the GDPR and its Article 5(1)(a) and Article 6
GDPR 87. These criteria stem from the content of the GDPR 88 and the interpretation
favourable to the rights of data subjects to be given thereto described in paragraph 97
above.
101. The GDPR makes WhatsApp IE, as the controller for the processing at stake, directly
responsible for complying with the GDPR’s principles, including the processing of data in
a lawful, fair and transparent manner, and any obligations derived therefrom 89. This
obligation applies even where the practical application of GDPR principles such as those
of Article 5(1)(a) and Article (5)(2) GDPR are inconvenient or run counter to the
commercial interests of WhatsApp IE. The controller is also obliged to be able to
demonstrate that it meets these principles and any obligations derived therefrom, such
as that it meets the specific conditions applicable to each legal basis 90. More specifically,
this condition to be able to rely on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR as a legal basis to process the data
subject’s data implies that a controller, in line with its accountability obligations under
Article 5(2) GDPR, has to be able to demonstrate that (a) a contract exists and (b) the
contract is valid pursuant to applicable national contract laws 91.

Draft Decision, paragraph 2.9, and WhatsApp IE's Article 65 Submission, paragraph 8.34.
As mentioned in Guidelines 2/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraph 18, the identification of the appropriate lawful basis
is tied to the principles of fairness and purpose limitation. It will be difficult for controllers to comply with these principles
if they have not first clearly identified the purposes of the processing, or if the processing of personal data goes beyond
what is necessary for the specified purposes. See also Section 5 below on the potential additional infringement of the
principles of fairness, purpose limitation and data minimisation.
86
Judgment of 11 December 2019, TK v Asociaţia de Proprietari bloc M5A-ScaraA, C-708/18, EU:C:2019:1064,
paragraph37.
87
Judgment of 18 December 2008, Heinz Huber v. Bundesrepublik Deutschland, C-524-06, EU:C:2008:724, paragraph
52 on the concept of necessity being interpreted in a manner that fully reflects the objective of Directive 95/46/EC.
On the importance of considering the practical effect (“effet utile”) sought by EU law in its interpretation, see alsofor
instance: judgment of 21 June 2022, Ligue desdroits humains v. Conseildes ministres, C-817/19, EU:C:2022:491, paragraph
195; and judgment of 17 September 2002, Muñoz and Superior Fruiticola, C-253/00, EU:C:2002:497, paragraph 30.
88
Article 1(1)(2) and (5) GDPR.
89
Article 5(2)GDPR “Principle of accountability” of controllers; see also Opinion of the Advocate General of 20 September
2022, Meta Platforms e.a., C-252/21, , EU:C:2022:704, paragraph 52.
90
Guidelines 2/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraph 26.
91
EDPB Binding decision 2/2022 on the dispute arisen on the draft decision of the IE SA regarding Meta Platforms Ireland
Limited (Instagram) under Article 65(1)(a) GDPR, adopted on 28 July 2022 (hereinafter “EDPB Binding decision
2/2022”), paragraph 84.
84
85

28

102. The EDPB agrees that supervisory authorities do not have, under the GDPR, a broad
and general competence in contractual matters. However, the EDPB considers that the
supervisory tasks, that the GDPR bestows on supervisory authorities, imply a limited
competence to assess a contract’s general validity insofar as this is relevant to the
fulfilment of their tasks under the GDPR 92. Otherwise, the supervisory authorities s would
see their monitoring and enforcement task under Article 57(1)(a) GDPR limited to actions,
such as verifying whether the processing at stake is necessary for the performance of a
contract (Article 6(1)(b) GDPR), and whether a contract with a processor under Article
28(3) GDPR and data importer under Article 46(2) GDPR includes appropriate safeguards
pursuant to the GDPR.
103. The DE SA and NL SA93 argue that the validity of the contract for the WhatsApp services
between the latter and the Complainant is questionable given the serious transparency
issues in relation to the legal basis relied on 94. In contract law, as a general rule, both
parties must be aware of the substance of the contract and of the obligations of both
parties to the contract in order to willingly enter into such contract.
104. Notwithstanding the possible invalidity of the contract, the EDPB refers to its previous
interpretative guidance on this matter 95 to provide below its analysis on whether the
processing for the purposes of service improvement and security features 96 is objectively
necessary for WhatsApp IE to provide its services to users based on its Terms of Service
and the nature of the services.
105. The EDPB recalls 97 that for the assessment of necessity under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, ”[i]t
is important to determine the exact rationale of the contract, i.e. its substance and
fundamental objective, as it is against this that it will be tested whether the data
processing is necessary for its performance” 98. As the EDPB has previously stated, regard
should be given to the particular aim, purpose, or objective of the service and, for
applicability of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, it is required that the processing is objectively
necessary for a purpose and integral to the delivery of that contractual service to the data
subject 99.
106. Moreover, the EDPB notes that the controller should be able to justify the necessity of
its processing by reference to the fundamental and mutually understood contractual

EDPB Guidelines 2/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraphs 9 and 13.
DE SA’s Objection, p.3 ; NL SA’s Objection, paragraph 10.
94
Draft Decision, paragraph 5.9.
95
Guidelines 2/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR.
96
For the term security, see paragraph 90 of this binding decision.
97
EDPB Binding decision 2/2022, paragraph 89.
98
Article 29 Working Party Opinion 06/2014 on the notion of legitimate interests of the data controller under Article 7
Directive 95/46/EC, WP 217, adopted on 9 April 2014 (hereinafter, “WP29 Opinion 06/2014 on the notion of
legitimate interests”), p. 17.
99
Guidelines 2/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraph 30.
92
93

29

purpose. This depends not only on the controller’s perspective, but also on a reasonable
data subject’s perspective when entering into the contract 100.
107. The IE SA accepts “that, as a general rule, the EPDB considers that processing for the
provision of new services […] would not be necessary for the performance of a contract for
online services” 101. However, the IE SA considers that in this particular case, having regard
to the specific terms of the contract and the nature of the services provided and agreed
upon by the parties, WhatsApp IE may in principle rely on Article 6(1)b) GDPR to process
the user’s data necessary for the provision of its service, including through the
improvement of the existing service and the maintenance of security standards.
108. In particular, the IE SA views service improvement to an existing service and “a
commitment to uphold certain standards relating to abuse, etc.” as a “core” element of
the contract between WhatsApp IE and the users 102. In support of this consideration, the
IE SA refers to the information provided in the WhatsApp Terms of Service under the
headings: “Ways To Improve Our Services.” and “Safety And Security.” 103 The IE SA
considers that it is clear that the WhatsApp services are advertised (and widely
understood) as ones that requires updates and improvement and so, that any reasonable
user would “be well-informed that this is precisely the nature of the service being offered
by WhatsApp and contained within the contract” 104.
109. The EDPB is of the opinion that WhatsApp IE is under the legal duty to assess whether
the processing of all its users data is necessary for the purpose of service improvements
or if there are alternative, less intrusive ways to pursue this purpose (e.g. instead of
relying on all users' data for the purpose of service improvements, rely on a pool of users,
who voluntarily agreed, by providing consent, to the processing of their personal data for
this purpose).
110. On this issue, the EDPB recalls that the concept of necessity has its own independent
meaning under EU law. It must be interpreted in a manner that fully reflects the objective
pursued by an EU instrument, in this case, the GDPR 105. Accordingly, the concept of
necessity under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR cannot be interpreted in a way that undermines this
provision and the GDPR’s general objective of protecting the right to the protection of
personal data 106 or contradicts Article 8 of the EU Charter. On the processing of data in
the WhatsApp services, Advocate General Rantos supports a strict interpretation of
EDPB Binding decision 2/2022, paragraph 90.
Draft Decision, paragraph 4.49.
102
Draft Decision, paragraph 4.41.
103
Draft Decision, paragraphs 4.34 and 4.35.
104
Draft Decision, paragraph 4.36.
105
See paragraphs 103-105 above on the principles guiding the interpretation of the GDPR and its provisions. The CJEU also
stated in Huber that ”what is at issue is a concept [necessity] which has its own independent meaning in Community law
and which must be interpreted in a manner which fully reflects the objective of that Directive, [Directive 95/46], as laid
down in Article 1(1) thereof”. Judgment of 18 December 2008, Heinz Huber v Bundesrepublik Deutschland, C-524/06,
EU:C:2008:724, paragraph 52.
106
Article 1(2) GDPR.
100
101

30

Article 6(1)(b) GDPR among other legal basis, particularly to avoid any circumvention of
the requirement for consent 107.
111. The EDPB finds that an average user cannot fully grasp what is meant by processing for
service improvement and security features, be aware of its consequences and impact on
their rights to privacy and data protection, and reasonably expect it solely based on
WhatsApp IE’s Terms of Service. Advocate General Rantos expresses similar doubts where
he states, in relation to Facebook behavioural advertising practices, “According to the
case-law of the Court of Justice, the processing must be objectively necessary for the
performance of the contract in the sense that there must be no realistic, less intrusive
alternatives, taking into account the reasonable expectations of the data subject. It also
concerns the fact that, where the contract consists of several separate services or elements
of a service that can be performed independently of one another, the applicability of
Article 6(1)(b) of the GDPR should be assessed in the context of each of those services
separately” 108 and adds in a footnote that “Moreover, although merely referencing or
mentioning data processing in a contract is not enough to bring the processing in question
within the scope of Article 6(1)(b) of the GDPR, processing may be objectively necessary
even if not specifically mentioned in the contract, without prejudice to the controller’s
transparency obligations” 109.
112. The EDPB provides in its guidance 110 assessing what is “necessary” involves a
combined, fact-based assessment of the processing “for the objective pursued and of
whether it is less intrusive compared to other options for achieving the same goal”. If
there are realistic, less intrusive alternatives, the processing is not “necessary”. Article
6(1)(b) GDPR does not cover processing which is useful but not objectively necessary for
performing the contractual service or for taking relevant pre-contractual steps at the
request of the data subject, even if it is necessary for the controller’s other business
purposes. While the possibility of improvements of services may routinely be included in
contractual terms, such processing usually cannot be regarded as being objectively
necessary for the performance of the contract with the user 111.
113. When analysing the performance of a contract as a legal basis, the necessity
requirement has to be interpreted strictly. As stated earlier by the Article 29 Working
Party (hereinafter “WP29”) 112, this “provision must be interpreted strictly and does not
Opinion of the Advocate General of 20 September 2022, Meta Platforms e.a., C-252/21), EU:C:2022:704, paragraph
§ 51. The EDPB refers to the Advocate General’s Opinion in its Binding Decision as an authoritative source of
interpretation to underline the EDPB’s reasoning on the processing of data in the Facebook service, without prejudice to
the case-law that the CJEU may create with its future judgments on Cases C-252/21 and C- 446/21.
108
Opinion of the Advocate General of 20 September 2022, Meta Platforms e.a., C-252/21, EU:C:2022:704, paragraph 54.
109
Ibid, footnote 165.
110
Guidelines 2/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraph 25.
111
Guidelines 2/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraph 49.
112
The WP 29 - the predecessor of the EDPB - was established under Article 29 of Directive 95/46/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of
personal data and on the free movement of such data (“Directive 95/46/EC”) and had a role, inter alia, to contribute to
uniform application of national measures adopted under the Directive. Many of substantive principles and provisions of
107

31

cover situations where the processing is not genuinely necessary for the performance of a
contract, but rather unilaterally imposed on the data subject by the controller” 113.
114. Concerning the processing of service improvement, the EDPB finds that a reasonable
user cannot expect that their personal data is being processed for service improvement
simply because WhatsApp IE briefly refers to this processing in its Terms of Service (which
both WhatsApp IE and the IE SA consider as constituting the entirety of the contract), or
because of the argument that “on the basis of the cont[r]act and wider circumstances,
that a reasonable user would have had sufficient understanding that the service included
the use of metrics for improvement” to which the IE SA refers 114.
115. In addition, the IE SA already decided 115 that WhatsApp IE infringed its transparency
obligations under Article 5(1)(a), Article 12(1) and Article 13(1)(c) GDPR by not clearly
informing the Complainant and other users of the WhatsApp IE services’ specific
processing operations, the personal data processed in them, the specific purposes they
serve, and the legal basis on which each of the processing operations relies, as the IE SA
concludes in its Draft Decision 116. The EDPB considers that this fundamental failure of
WhatsApp IE to comply with its transparency obligations contradicts the IE SA’s finding 117
that WhatsApp IE’s users could reasonably expect service improvement and security
features as being necessary for the performance of their contract.
116. As regards security, the lack of clarity of the Terms of Service makes it even hard to
understand what are the different purposes pursued and processing carried out 118.
117. The EDPB recalls that “controllers should make sure to avoid any confusion as to what
the applicable legal basis is” and that this is “particularly relevant where the appropriate
legal basis is Article 6(1)(b) GDPR and a contract regarding online services is entered into
by data subjects”, because “[d]epending on the circumstances, data subjects may
erroneously get the impression that they are giving their consent in line with Article 6(1)(a)
GDPR when signing a contract or accepting terms of service” 119. Article 6(1)(b) GDPR
requires the existence of a contract, its validity, and the processing being necessary to
perform it. These conditions cannot be met where one of the parties (in this case a data
subject) is not provided with sufficient information to know that they are signing a
contract, the processing of personal data that it involves, for which specific purposes and
on which legal basis, and how this processing is necessary to perform the services
delivered. For the purposes of service improvement and security features, WhatsApp IE
has not relied on any other legal basis to process personal data. These transparency
the GDPR already existed in the Directive 95/46/EC, such as the one at stake in this Binding decision, thus WP29 guidance
in this respect is relevant for the interpretation of the GDPR.
113
WP29 Opinion06/2014 on the notion of legitimate interests, p. 16.
114
Composite Response, paragraph 59.
115
Draft Decision, paragraph 5.9.
116
Draft Decision, paragraph 5.9 and Finding 3.
117
Draft Decision, paragraph 4.42.
118
For the meaning of the term “security”, see paragraph 90 above.
119
EDPB Binding Decision01/2021, paragraph 214, and Guidelines 2/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraph 20.

32

requirements are not only an additional and separate obligation, but also an
indispensable and constitutive part of the legal basis.
118. Given that the main purpose for which a user uses the WhatsApp services is to
communicate with others, and that WhatsApp IE conditions their use to the user’s
acceptance of a contract and the service improvement and security 120 features they
include, the EDPB cannot see how a user would have the possibility of opting out of a
particular processing which is part of the contract. Thus, WhatsApp IE is accountable to
prove that the legal basis applied for the processing at hand is valid and the failure to
demonstrate this proves that Article 6(1) GDPR is not the applicable legal basis.
119. The EDPB agrees with the DE SA, FI SA, FR SA, NL SA and NO SA121 that there is a risk
that the Draft Decision’s failure to establish WhatsApp IE’s infringement of Article 6(1)(b)
GDPR, pursuant to its interpretation by the IE SA, nullifies this provision and makes
theoretically lawful any collection and reuse of personal data in connection with the
performance of a contract with a data subject. WhatsApp IE currently leaves the
Complainant and other users of the WhatsApp services with a “take it or leave it” choice.
They may either contract away their right to freely determine the processing of their
personal data and submit to its processing for service improvements or security features,
which they can neither expect, nor fully understand based on the insufficient information
WhatsApp IE provides to them. Alternatively, they may decline accepting WhatsApp IE’s
Terms of Service and thus be excluded from a service that enables them to communicate
with millions of users.
120. This precedent could encourage other economic operators to use the contractual
performance legal basis of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR for all their processing of personal data.
There would be the risk that some controllers argue some connection between the
processing of the personal data of their consumers and the contract to collect, retain and
process as much personal data from their users as possible and advance their economic
interests at the expense of the safeguards for data subjects. Some of the safeguards from
which data subjects would be deprived due to an inappropriate use of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR
as legal basis, instead of others such as consent under Article 6(1)(a) GDPR and legitimate
interest under Article 6(1)(f) GDPR, are the possibility to specifically consent to certain
processing operations and not to others and to the further processing of their personal
data (Article 6(4) GDPR); their freedom to withdraw consent (Article 7 GDPR); their right
to be forgotten (Article 17 GDPR); and the balancing exercise of the legitimate interests
of the controller against their interests or fundamental rights and freedoms (Article 6(1)(f)
GDPR).

For the meaning of the term “security”, see paragraph 90 above.
DE SA’s Objections – p. 6, paragraph 2 andp. 8, paragraph 1; FI SA’s Objections – p. 7, paragraphs 32 and 33 ; FR SA’s
Objections – paragraph 14 ; NL SA’s Objections – paragraphs 8 and 28; NO SA’s Objections – p. 4, paragraph 3.

120
121

33

121. The EDPB thus concurs with the objections of the DE SA, FI SA, FR SA, NL SA and NO
SA 122 to Finding 2 of the Draft Decision in that the processing for the purposes of service
improvements and security 123 features performed by WhatsApp IE are objectively not
necessary for the performance of WhatsApp IE’s alleged contract with its users and are
not an essential or core element of such contract.
122. In conclusion, the EDPB decides that WhatsApp IE has inappropriately relied on Article
6(1)(b) GDPR to process the Complainant’s personal data for the purpose of service
improvement and security 124 features in the context of its Terms of Service and therefore
lacks a legal basis to process these data. The EDPB was not required to examine whether
data processing for such purposes could be based on other legal bases because the
controller relied solely on Article 6 (1) (b) GDPR. WhatsApp IE has consequently infringed
Article 6(1) GDPR by unlawfully processing personal data. The EDPB instructs the IE SA to
alter its Finding 2 of its Draft Decision which concludes that WhatsApp IE may rely on
Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of its offering of Terms of Service and to include an
infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR based on the shortcomings that the EDPB has identified.

3.52

On the basis of the above, and as directed by the EDPB further to the Article 65 Decision, I find
that WhatsApp was not entitled to rely on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR to process the Complainant’s
personal data for the purpose of service improvement and security in the context of the
WhatsApp Terms of Service.

Finding 2:
I find that WhatsApp was not entitled to rely on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR to process the Complainant’s
personal data for the purpose of service improvement and security in the context of the WhatsApp
Terms of Service.

4

ISSUE 3 – WHETHER WHATSAPP PROVIDED THE REQUISITE INFORMATION ON THE LEGAL BASIS FOR PROCESSING
ON FOOT OF ARTICLE 6(1)(B) GDPR AND WHETHER IT DID SO IN A TRANSPARENT MANNER

4.1

Processing of personal data, including transparency requirements of the GDPR, are governed by
the overarching principles set out in Article 5 GDPR, which provides that:
“1. Personal data shall be:
(a) processed lawfully, fairly and in a transparent manner in relation to the data subject
(‘lawfulness, fairness and transparency’);

DE SA’s Objections – p. 5, paragraphs 3 and 4; ; FI SA’s Objections – p. 6, paragraph 24; FR SA’s Objections – p. 7,
paragraph 38 ; NL SA’s Objections – paragraph26; NO SA’s Objections - p. 8.
123
For the meaning of the term “security”, see paragraph 90 above.
124
For the meaning of the term “security”, see paragraph 90 above.
122

34

(b) collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed In a
manner that is incompatible with those purposes; further processing for archiving
purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical
purposes shall, in accordance with Article 89(1), not be considered to be incompatible with
the initial purposes (‘purpose limitation’);
(c) adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for
which they are processed (‘data minimisation’);
(d) accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date; every reasonable step must be taken
to ensure that personal data that are inaccurate, having regard to the purposes for which
they are processed, are erased or rectified without delay (‘accuracy’);
(e) kept in a form which permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is
necessary for the purposes for which the personal data are processed; personal data may
be stored for longer periods insofar as the personal data will be processed solely for
archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or
statistical purposes in accordance with Article 89(1) subject to implementation of the
appropriate technical and organisational measures required by this Regulation in order to
safeguard the rights and freedoms of the data subject (‘storage limitation’);
(f) processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security of the personal data, including
protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidental loss,
destruction or damage, using appropriate technical or organisational measures (‘integrity
and confidentiality’).
2. The controller shall be responsible for, and be able to demonstrate compliance with, paragraph
1 (‘accountability’).”
4.2

Recital 58 of the GDPR, which serves as an aid to interpretation, states:
“The principle of transparency requires that any information addressed to the public or to
the data subject be concise, easily accessible and easy to understand, and that clear and
plain language and, additionally, where appropriate, visualisation be used.
Such information could be provided in electronic form, for example, when addressed to
the public, through a website.
This is of particular relevance in situations where the proliferation of actors and the
technological complexity of practice make it difficult for the data subject to know and
35

understand whether, by whom and for what purpose personal data relating to him or her
are being collected, such as in the case of online advertising.
Given that children merit specific protection, any information and communication, where
processing is addressed to a child, should be in such a clear and plain language that the
child can easily understand.”
4.3

Article 12(1) GDPR provides for the general manner in which information required by the
transparency provisions of the GDPR should be set out:
“The controller shall take appropriate measures to provide any information referred to in
Articles 13 and 14 and any communication under Articles 15 to 22 and 34 relating to
processing to the data subject in a concise, transparent, intelligible and easily accessible
form, using clear and plain language, in particular for any information addressed
specifically to a child. The information shall be provided in writing, or by other means,
including, where appropriate, by electronic means. When requested by the data subject,
the information may be provided orally, provided that the identity of the data subject is
proven by other means.”

4.4

Article 13 GDPR enumerates specific categories of information that must be provided to data
subjects by data controllers in order to comply with transparency obligations:
“1. Where personal data relating to a data subject are collected from the data subject, the
controller shall, at the time when personal data are obtained, provide the data subject with all of
the following information:
(a) the identity and the contact details of the controller and, where applicable, of the
controller’s representative;
(b) the contact details of the data protection officer, where applicable;
(c) the purposes of the processing for which the personal data are intended as well as the
legal basis for the processing;
(d) where the processing is based on point (f) of Article 6(1), the legitimate interests
pursued by the controller or by a third party;
(e) the recipients or categories of recipients of the personal data, if any;
(f) where applicable, the fact that the controller intends to transfer personal data to a
third country or international organisation and the existence or absence of an adequacy
36

decision by the Commission, or in the case of transfers referred to in Article 46 or 47, or
the second subparagraph of Article 49(1), reference to the appropriate or suitable
safeguards and the means by which to obtain a copy of them or where they have been
made available.
2. In addition to the information referred to in paragraph 1, the controller shall, at the time when
personal data are obtained, provide the data subject with the following further information
necessary to ensure fair and transparent processing:
(a) the period for which the personal data will be stored, or if that is not possible, the
criteria used to determine that period;
(b) the existence of the right to request from the controller access to and rectification or
erasure of personal data or restriction of processing concerning the data subject or to
object to processing as well as the right to data portability;
(c) where the processing is based on point (a) of Article 6(1) or point (a) of Article 9(2), the
existence of the right to withdraw consent at any time, without affecting the lawfulness
of processing based on consent before its withdrawal;
(d) the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority;
(e) whether the provision of personal data is a statutory or contractual requirement, or a
requirement necessary to enter into a contract, as well as whether the data subject is
obliged to provide the personal data and of the possible consequences of failure to provide
such data;
(f) the existence of automated decision-making, including profiling, referred to in Article
22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaningful information about the logic involved,
as well as the significance and the envisaged consequences of such processing for the data
subject.
3. Where the controller intends to further process the personal data for a purpose other than that
for which the personal data were collected, the controller shall provide the data subject prior to
that further processing with information on that other purpose and with any relevant further
information as referred to in paragraph 2.
4. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not apply where and insofar as the data subject already has the
information.”

37

4.5

In its Transparency Guidelines, which have been adopted by the EDPB, the Article 29 Working
Party found that:
“A central consideration of the principle of transparency outlined in these provisions is
that the data subject should be able to determine in advance what the scope and
consequences of the processing entails and that they should not be taken by surprise at a
later point about the ways in which their personal data has been used.” 125

4.6

In the Complaint, the Complainant alleged that WhatsApp’s updated Terms of Service and the
hyperlinked Data Policy, together with the mode of acceptance (namely, clicking an “accept”
button) on the Terms of Service, created the conditions which led to the belief “that all these
processing operations” were based on consent under 6(1)(a) GDPR. 126 The Investigator therefore
examined whether it could be alleged that the Complainant was led to believe this was the case.

4.7

The Complainant argued that there was a lack of clarity in respect of the data processing which
was carried out on foot of the “forced consent” to the Terms of Service. Indeed, the Complaint
states that “[e]ven if a trained lawyer reads all the text that the controller provides, he/she can
only guess what data is processed, for which exact purpose and on which legal basis. This is
inherently non-transparent and unfair within the meaning of Articles 5(1)(a) and 13(c).” 127
Furthermore, the Complainant argued that:
“The controller has in fact relied on a number of legal grounds under Article 6(1) of the
GDPR, but has given the data subject the impression, that he solely relies on consent, by
requesting the data subject to agree to the privacy policy (see above). Asking for consent
to a processing operation, when the controller relies in fact on another legal basis is
fundamentally unfair, misleading and non-transparent within the meaning of Article
5(1)(a) of the GDPR….”

4.8

Therefore, and in accordance with my determination concerning the scope of the Complaint, as
set out in the Draft Decision, I found that there was an inherent allegation in the Complaint that
the legal basis relied on by WhatsApp for processing personal data in accordance with the
acceptance of the Terms of Service is unclear. Article 5(1)(a) GDPR sets out the requirement that,
at a general level, personal data must be processed in a transparent manner. More specific
transparency requirements are contained in Articles 12 and 13 GDPR. In particular, Article 13(1)(c)
GDPR requires that “the purposes of the processing for which the personal data are intended as
well as the legal basis for processing” must be made clear to a user. Article 12(1) GDPR states that
the information that is required to be provided pursuant to Article 13 GDPR must be provided in

Article 29 Working Party Guidelines on transparency under Regulation 2016/679, page 7, paragraph 10,
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/item-detail.cfm?item_id=622227.
126
Complaint, page 2.
127
Ibid. paragraph 2.3.1.
125

38

a clear and transparent manner. Article 13 GDPR therefore prescribes the information which must
be provided to the data subject whereas Article 12(1) GDPR sets out the way in which this
information should be provided.
4.9

The Commission previously concluded an own-volition inquiry pursuant to Section 110 of the 2018
Act, and made a decision under Section 111 of the 2018 Act, in relation to the extent to which
WhatsApp’s Privacy Policy achieved compliance with the GDPR’s transparency framework (“the
WhatsApp Transparency Decision”). This included an assessment of compliance with these
provisions of the GDPR in the context of processing carried out pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) GDPR.
This decision made findings to the effect that the transparency provisions were infringed,
including in relation to the information that WhatsApp was required to provide, pursuant to
Articles 12(1) and 13(1)(c) GDPR, concerning any processing carried out pursuant to Article 6(1)(b)
GDPR. The decision included the exercise of a number of corrective powers, including an
administrative fine and an order requiring WhatsApp to bring the Privacy Policy into compliance.
In circumstances where the issues raised by the transparency aspect of the Complaint have
already, by way of the WhatsApp Transparency Decision, been examined and determined by the
Commission, it is not necessary for me to carry out any further examination in relation to the
same subject-matter in the context of this Inquiry. I note that the views expressed by the
Complainant and her representative, in respect of this particular aspect of the Complaint, are
consistent with the outcome of the corresponding part of the WhatsApp Transparency Decision.
On this basis, it is clear that the Complainant has identified infringements of the GDPR, and I
therefore uphold that aspect of the Complaint.

4.10

As noted above, a number of corrective powers were exercised against WhatsApp pursuant to
the WhatsApp Transparency Decision, which took into account every impacted data subject in the
EEA, including the Complainant. I further note, in this regard, that WhatsApp has already taken
the action required to achieve compliance with the order to bring processing into compliance that
was made further to the WhatsApp Transparency Decision. In these circumstances, I do not
consider it appropriate, proportionate or necessary to exercise further corrective powers, in
response to this particular finding of infringement.

Outcome re: Issue 3:
In relation to compliance with Articles 12(1) and 13(1)(c) GDPR for processing carried out on foot of
Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, the Commission has already found in a previous inquiry that WhatsApp has
infringed the GDPR in this regard. On the basis that the Complainant has identified infringements of the
GDPR, this aspect of the Complaint is upheld.

5

ADDITIONAL ISSUE: WHETHER WHATSAPP INFRINGED THE ARTICLE 5(1)(A) PRINCIPLE OF FAIRNESS

5.1

During the course of the Article 60 consultation period, the Italian supervisory authority raised an
objection to the Draft Decision, the purpose of which was to require the amendment of the Draft
39

Decision to include a new finding of infringement of the Article 5(1)(a) principle of fairness. The
Commission decided not to follow the objection in circumstances where compliance with the
Article 5(1)(a) principle of fairness was not examined during the course of this inquiry and,
consequently, WhatsApp was never afforded the opportunity to be heard in response to a
particularised allegation of wrongdoing, as required by Irish and EU law. Accordingly the
Commission referred the objection to the EDPB for determination pursuant to Article 65(1)(a)
GDPR. Having considered the matter, the EDPB determined as follows:
142. At first, the EDPB notes that the concept of fairness is not defined as such in the GDPR.
However, recital 39 GDPR provides some elements as to its meaning and effect in the
context of processing of personal data. An important aspect of the principle of fairness
under Article 5(1) GDPR, which is linked to recital 39, is that data subjects should be able
to determine in advance what the scope and consequences of the processing entails and
that they should not be taken by surprise at a later point about the ways in which their
personal data have been used 128.
143. Fairness is an overarching principle, which requires that personal data shall not be
processed in a way that is unjustifiably detrimental, unlawfully discriminatory,
unexpected or misleading to the data subject. Measures and safeguards implementing
the principle of fairness also support the rights and freedoms of data subjects, specifically
the right to information (transparency), the right to intervene (access, erasure, data
portability, rectification) and the right to limit the processing (right not to be subject to
automated individual decision-making and non-discrimination of data subjects in such
processing) 129.
144. The principles of fair and transparent processing require that the data subject shall be
informed of the existence of the processing operation and its purposes. The controller
should provide the data subject with any further information necessary to ensure fair
and transparent processing taking into account the specific circumstances and context in
which the personal data are processed. Furthermore, the data subject should be
informed of the existence of profiling and the consequences of such profiling 130.
145. The EDPB underlines that the principles of fairness, lawfulness and transparency, all
three enshrined in Article 5(1)(a) GDPR, are three distinct but intrinsically linked and
interdependent principles that every controller should respect when processing personal
data. The link between these principles is evident from a number of GDPR provisions:
recitals 39 and 42, Article 6(2) and Article 6(3)(b) GDPR refer to lawful and fair processing,
while recitals 60 and 71 GDPR, as well as Article 13(2), Article 14(2) and Article 40(2)(a)
GDPR refer to fair and transparent processing.

WP29 Guidelines on transparency under Regulation 2016/679, paragraph 10.
EDPB Guidelines 4/2019 on Article 25 Data Protection by Design and by Default, Version 2, Adopted on 20 October
2020, hereinafter “Guidelines on Data Protection by Design and by Default”).
130
Recital 60 GDPR.
128
129

40

146. The IT SA states that “the infringement of Article 5(1)(a) GDPR should be found by the LSA
in the case at hand by having also regard to the more general fairness principle, which
entails separate requirements from those relating specifically to transparency.” 131
147. There is no dispute that in its Decision on WhatsApp IE’s Transparency, the IE SA found a
breach of the transparency principle, but the EDPB considers that the principle of fairness
has an independent meaning and stresses that an assessment of WhatsApp IE’s
compliance with the principle of transparency does not automatically rule out the need
for an assessment of WhatsApp IE’s compliance with the principle of fairness too.
148. The EDPB recalls that, in data protection law, the concept of fairness stems from the EU
Charter 132. The EDPB has already provided some elements as to the meaning and effect
of the principle of fairness in the context of processing personal data. For example, the
EDPB has previously opined in its Guidelines on Data Protection by Design and by Default
that “Fairness is an overarching principle which requires that personal data should not be
processed in a way that is unjustifiably detrimental, unlawfully discriminatory,
unexpected or misleading to the data subject” 133. Among the key fairness elements that
controllers should consider in this regard, the EDPB mentions autonomy of the data
subjects, data subjects’ expectation, power balance, avoidance of deception, ethical and
truthful processing 134. These elements are particularly relevant in the case at hand. The
principle of fairness under Article 5(1)(a) GDPR underpins the entire data protection
framework and seeks to address power asymmetries between controllers and data
subjects in order to cancel out the negative effects of such asymmetries and ensure the
effective exercise of data subjects’ rights.
149. The EDPB has previously explained that “the principle of fairness includes, inter alia,
recognising the reasonable expectations of the data subjects, considering possible
adverse consequences processing may have on them, and having regard to the
relationship and potential effects of imbalance between them and the controller” 135. The
EDPB recalls that a fair balance must be struck between, on the one hand, the
commercial interests of controllers and, on the other hand, the rights and expectations
of data subjects under the GDPR 136. A key aspect of compliance with the principle of
fairness under Article 5(1)(a) GDPR refers to pursuing “power balance” as a “key objective

IT SA’s Objection, paragraph 3, p. 9.
Article 8 of the EU Charter states as follows: “1. Everyone has the right to the protection of personal data concerning
him or her. 2. Such data must be processed fairly for specified purposes and on the basis of the consent of the person
concerned or some other legitimate basis laid down by law” (emphasis added).
133
EDPB 4/2019 Guidelines on Article 25, Data Protection by Design and by Default, version 2, adopted on 20 October
2022, (hereinafter “Guidelines on Data Protection by Design and by Default”) paragraph 69.
134
Guidelines on Data Protection by Design and by Default, paragraph 70.
135
Guidelines on Article 65(1)(a), paragraph 12.
136
On the balance between the different interests at stake see for example: Judgment of 12 December 2013, X, C486/12, EU:C:2013:836; Judgment of 7 May 2009, College van burgemeester en wethouders van Rotterdam v M. E. E.
Rijkeboer, C-553/07, EU:C:2009:293; Judgment of 9 November 2010 in joined cases, Volker und Markus Schecke GbR, C92/09, and Hartmut Eifert,C-93/09, v Land Hessen, EU:C:2010:662.
131
132

41

of the controller-data subject relationship” 137, especially in the context of online services
provided without monetary payment, where users are often not aware of the ways and
extent to which their personal data is being processed 138. Consequently, if data subjects
are not enabled to determine what is done with their personal data, this is in contrast
with the element of “autonomy” of data subjects as to the control of the processing of
their personal data 139.
150. Considering the constantly increasing economic value of personal data in the digital
environment, it is particularly important to ensure that data subjects are protected from
any form of abuse and deception, intentional or not, which would result in the unjustified
loss of control over their personal data. Compliance by providers of online services acting
as controllers with all three of the cumulative requirements under Article 5(1)(a) GDPR,
taking into account the particular service that is being provided and the characteristics
of their users, serves as a shield from the danger of abuse and deception, especially in
situations of power asymmetries. Therefore, the EDPB disagrees with the IE SA’s finding
that assessing WhatsApp IE’s compliance with the principle of fairness “would therefore
not only represent a significant departure from the scope of inquiry, as formulated, but it
would also risk breaching the controller’s right to a fair procedure, as regards any matter
which was never put to the complainant during the course of inquiry.” 140 In addition, it is
important to note that WhatsApp IE has been heard on the objections and therefore
submitted written submissions on this matter 141.
151. The EDPB has previously emphasised that the identification of the appropriate lawful
basis is tied to the principles of fairness and purpose limitation 142. In this regard, the IT
SA rightly observes that while finding a breach of transparency relates to the way in
which information has been provided to users via the terms of service and the Privacy
Policy, compliance with the principle of fairness also relates to ‘how the controller
addressed the lawfulness of the processing activities in connection with its calling and
messaging service’ 143. Thus, the EDPB considers that an assessment of compliance by
WhatsApp IE with the principle of fairness requires also an assessment of the
consequences that the choice and presentation of the legal basis entail for the WhatsApp
services’ users. In addition, that assessment cannot be made in the abstract, but has to
take into account the specificities of the particular messaging service and of the
processing of personal data carried out, namely for purposes related to improvements
of the messaging service 144.
Guidelines on Data Protection by Design and by Default, paragraph 70.
On “online services”, see Guidelines 1/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraphs 3-5.
139
Guidelines on Data Protection by Design and by Default, paragraph 70. According to this element of fairness, “data
subjects should be granted the highest degree of autonomy possible to determine the use made of their personal data,
as well as over the scope and conditions of that use or processing”.
140
Composite Response, paragraph 30.
141
WhatsApp IE’s Article 65 Submissions, Category 1f: “The [Commission] should also make findings that WhatsApp
Ireland infringed the fairness principle under Article 5(1)(a) GDPR/ lawfulness principle under Article 5(1)(a) GDPR“, p. 31.
142
Guidelines 1/2019 on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, paragraph 1.
143
IT SA’s Objection, p. 9.
144
Draft Decision, paragraph 4.40.
137
138

42

152. The EDPB notes that in this particular case, the Complainant was forced to consent to the
Terms of Service and the Privacy Policy 145 and this clearly impacts the reasonable
expectations of WhatsApp IE’s users by confusing them on whether clicking the ”Accept”
button results in giving their consent to the processing of their personal data. The EDPB
notes in this regard that one of the elements of compliance with the principle of fairness
is avoiding deception (i.e. providing information “in an objective and neutral way,
avoiding any deceptive or manipulative language or design” 146).
153. As the IE SA itself notes, the Complainant argues that WhatsApp IE relied on ”forced
consent” for the processing simply because it did in fact believe that the controller was
relying on the legal basis of consent for that processing 147. The Complainant presents the
screenshot, aiming to demonstrate that, “the data subject was presented with an easy
click to quickly consent, and to return to the service.” 148 The EDPB keeps in mind that in
the complaint, this was explained in the context of arguing that consent was forced.
Therefore, the EDPB shares the IT SA’s concern that WhatsApp IE misrepresented the
legal basis of the processing and that WhatsApp IE’s users are left ”in the dark” as to the
possible connections between the purposes sought, the applicable legal basis and the
relevant processing activities 149. This being said, the EDPB considers that the processing
by WhatsApp IE cannot be regarded as ethical and truthful 150 because it is confusing with
regard to the type of data processed, the legal basis used and the purposes of the
processing, which ultimately restricts the WhatsApp IE’s users’ possibility to exercise
their data subjects’ rights.
154. Considering the seriousness of WhatsApp IE’s misrepresentation on the legal basis relied
on identified in the current Binding decision 151, the EDPB agrees with the IT SA that
WhatsApp IE has presented its service to its users in a misleading manner 152, which
adversely affects their control over the processing of their personal data and the exercise
of their data subjects' rights.
155. This is all the more supported by the fact that the circumstances of the present case as
demonstrated above 153 and the infringement of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR 154further intensify
the imbalanced nature of the relationship between WhatsApp IE and its users brought
up by the IT SA’s objection.

See paragraph 3 above.
Guidelines on Data Protection by Design and by Default, paragraph 70.
147
Draft Decision, paragraph 5.7.
148
Complaint, p. 5.
149
IT SA’s Objection, p. 9.
150
Guidelines on Data Protection by Design and by Default, paragraph 70, where the EDPB explains that “ethical” means
that “The controller should see the processing’s wider impact on individuals’ rights and dignity“ and “truthful” means
that “The controller must make available information about how they process personal data, they should act as they
declare they will and not mislead the data subjects”.
151
See, paragraph 117 above.
152
IT SA Objection, page 9.
153
Draft Decision, paragraphs 148-153.
154
Draft Decision, paragraphs 117 and 122.
145
146

43

156. The combination of factors, such as the unbalanced relationship between WhatsApp IE
and its users, combined with the “take it or leave it” situation that they are facing due to
the lack of alternative services in the market and the lack of options allowing them to
adjust or opt out from a particular processing under their contract with WhatsApp IE,
systematically disadvantages them, limits their control over the processing of their
personal data and undermines the exercise of their rights under Chapter III GDPR.
157. Therefore, the EDPB instructs the IE SA to include a finding of an infringement of the
principle of fairness under Article 5(1)(a) GDPR by WhatsApp IE and to adopt the
appropriate corrective measures, by addressing, but without being limited to, the
question of an administrative fine for this infringement as provided for in Section 8 of
this Binding decision.

5.2

Accordingly, and as directed by the EDPB further to the Article 65 Decision, I find that WhatsApp
has infringed the principle of fairness pursuant to Article 5(1)(a) GDPR.

Finding 4:
I find that WhatsApp has infringed the principle of fairness pursuant to Article 5(1)(a) GDPR.

6

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS/OUTCOME
ISSUE
Reliance on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR

FINDING/OUTCOME
I find that WhatsApp infringed Article 6(1)
GDPR when it relied on Article 6(1)(b)
GDPR to process the Complainant’s
personal data for the purpose of service
improvement and security in the context
of its offering of Terms of Service.

Whether WhatsApp failed to provide necessary The Commission has found infringements
information regarding its legal basis for processing in this regard in a previous inquiry (and
pursuant to acceptance of the Terms of Service exercised corrective powers in response).
and whether the information set out was set out
in a transparent manner.
As raised by the Italian SA by way of its objection,
whether WhatsApp infringed the Article 5(1)(a)
principle of fairness in the context of its approach
to the provision of information as part of the
presentation of its Terms of Service to the
Complainant.

As directed by the EDPB pursuant to the
Article 65 Decision, I find that WhatsApp
has infringed the Article 5(1)(a) principle
of fairness.

44

7

DECISION ON CORRECTIVE POWERS

7.1

In the Draft Decision, I proposed to conclude findings of infringement of Articles 12(1) and 13(1)(c)
GDPR. As already noted, further to the assessment of Issue 3, above, these proposed findings
overlapped with those that were already found to have occurred in the WhatsApp Transparency
Decision. As further noted, a number of corrective powers were exercised against WhatsApp
pursuant to the WhatsApp Transparency Decision, which took into account every impacted data
subject in the EU/EEA, including the Complainant. I further note that WhatsApp has already taken
the action required to achieve compliance with the order to bring processing into compliance that
was made further to the WhatsApp Transparency Decision such that the identified transparency
deficits have since been rectified. In these circumstances, the exercise of further corrective
powers, in response to the upholding of the transparency element of the Complaint, could not be
considered to be appropriate, proportionate or necessary.

7.2

As a consequence, however, of the infringements of Article 6(1) and the Article 5(1)(a) principle
of fairness that were established by the EDPB in the Article 65 Decision, the EDPB further directed
the Commission to address those infringements by way of the exercise of corrective powers,
namely the making of an order to bring processing into compliance and the imposition of an
administrative fine.

8

ORDER TO BRING PROCESSING INTO COMPLIANCE

8.1

The requirement to make an order to bring processing into compliance, in connection with the
Article 6(1) infringement, arose from an objection that was raised by the Finnish supervisory
authority during the course of the Article 60 GDPR consultation period. That objection required
the Commission to both establish a finding of infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR (which was
determined by the EDPB, as already detailed above) and, as a consequence of that finding, to
make an order requiring WhatsApp to bring its processing into compliance. Considering this,
second, limb of the Finnish objection, the EDPB determined as follows:
“269. The EDPB agrees with the FI SA that “the infringement cannot be consider as minor”. The
EDPB reiterates that lawfulness of processing is one of the fundamental pillars of the data
protection law and considers that processing of personal data without an appropriate legal
basis is a clear and serious violation of the data subjects’ fundamental right to data protection.
In addition, the infringement in the present case concerns a high number of data subjects and
a large amount of personal data.
270. Indeed, the EDPB agrees with the FI SA that “If the IE SA does not make use of their
respective corrective powers, there is danger that WhatsApp continues to unlawfully process
personal data on the foot of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR” for service improvement and security
45

processing operations and “there is a danger that WhatsApp continues to undermine or
bypass” data protection principles. In addition, failure to adopt any corrective measure in this
case “would amount to a dangerous precedent, sending a deceiving message to the market
and to data subjects, and would endanger the fundamental rights and freedoms of data
subjects whose personal data are and will be processed by the controller”.
271. As a consequence, the EDPB finds it appropriate for an order to bring processing into
compliance to be imposed in this case (without prejudice to the additional conclusions in
respect of the imposition of administrative fines available below in Section 8).
272. According to the EDPB, the deadline for compliance with the order should be reasonable
and proportionate, in light of the potential for harms to the data subject rights and the
resources available to the controller to achieve compliance.
273. Finally, the EDPB recalls that non-compliance with an order issued by a supervisory
authority can be relevant both in terms of it being subject to administrative fines up to
20.000.000 euros or, in the case of an undertaking, up to 4% of the total worldwide annual
turnover of the preceding financial year in line with Article 83(6) GDPR, and in terms of it being
an aggravating factor for the imposition of administrative fines.335 In addition, the
investigative powers of supervisory authorities allow them to order the provision of all the
information necessary for the performance of their tasks including the verification of
compliance with one of their orders.
274. In light of the above, the EDPB instructs the IE SA to include in its final decision an order
for WhatsApp IE to bring its processing of personal data for the purposes of service
improvement and security features in the context of its Terms of Service into compliance with
Article 6(1) GDPR in accordance with the conclusion reached by the EDPB337 within a specified
period of time.”

8.2

As regards the deadline for compliance with the order that the Commission is required to impose,
paragraph 272 of the Article 65 Decision provides that:
“… the deadline for compliance with the order should be reasonable and proportionate, in light
of the potential for harms to the data subject rights and the resources available to the controller
to achieve compliance”

8.3

Footnote 334 to the Article 65 Decision clarifies, in this regard, that:

46

“The EDPB recalls its Binding Decision 1/2021 adopted on 28 July 2021 where the EDPB was
called to resolve a dispute pursuant to Article 65 GDPR concerning, among others, the
appropriateness of the deadline for compliance suggested in the draft decision at stake. After
highlighting the relevance of Recitals 129 as well as 148 GDPR for the imposition of corrective
measures, the EDPB took into account the number of data subjects affected and the importance
of the interest of affected data subjects in seeing the relevant provisions of the GDPR complied
with in a short timeframe. While the EDPB also took note of the challenges highlighted by the
controller, it found in that case that a compliance order with a three months’ timeframe could
not be considered disproportionate considering the infringement as well as the type of
organization, its size and the means (including inter alia financial resources but also legal
expertise) available to it. Consequently, the EDPB instructed the LSA to amend the draft decision
by reducing the deadline for compliance from six months to three months. EDPB Binding
Decision 1/2021, paragraphs 254-263.”
8.4

The Commission notes that EDPB Binding Decision 1/2021 also concerned WhatsApp and, in these
circumstances, the EDPB’s observations, as regards the “type of organisation, its size and the
means (including inter alia financial resources but also legal expertise) available to it” apply
equally to the subject matter of this Section 8.

8.5

As regards the other factors referenced at footnote 334, the Commission notes the views of the
EDPB, as set out in paragraph 269 of the Article 65 Decision, that:
“The EDPB agrees with the FI SA that “the infringement cannot be consider as minor”. The EDPB
reiterates that lawfulness of processing is one of the fundamental pillars of the data protection
law and considers that processing of personal data without an appropriate legal basis is a clear
and serious violation of the data subjects’ fundamental right to data protection. All violations
of the GDPR should be accompanied by the imposition of appropriate corrective measures. This
is all the more the case with the violation of a fundamental and core obligation such as
lawfulness, especially when affecting a high number of data subjects and a large amount of
personal data.”

8.6

The Commission notes that the views expressed by the EDPB, above, concerning the
characteristics of the Article 6(1) GDPR infringement, are very similar to those expressed on the
same subject matter in its Binding Decision 1/2021 (and as repeated at footnote 334 to the Article
65 Decision). In the circumstances, the Commission proposed to include a 3-month deadline for
compliance with the terms of the order, to commence from the day following the date of service
of the Commission’s final decision.

8.7

Accordingly, the Commission proposed to amend the Draft Decision to include an order to bring
processing into compliance in the following terms:
a) WhatsApp is hereby required to take the necessary action to bring its processing of
personal data for the purposes of service improvement and security features (excluding
47

processing for the purpose of “IT Security” as defined by paragraph 90 of the Article 65
Decision) (“the Processing”) in the context of its Terms of Service into compliance with
Article 6(1) GDPR in accordance with the conclusion reached by the EDPB, as recorded at
paragraph 274 of the Article 65 Decision within a period of three months, commencing
on the day following the date of service of the Commission’s final decision.
b) More specifically, WhatsApp is required to take the necessary action to address the
EDPB’s finding that WhatsApp is not entitled to carry out the Processing on the basis of
Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, taking into account the analysis and views expressed by the EDPB in
Section 4.4.2 of the Article 65 Decision. Such action may include, but is not limited to, the
identification of an appropriate alternative legal basis, in Article 6(1) GDPR, for the
Processing together with the implementation of any necessary measures, as might be
required to satisfy the conditionality associated with that/those alternative legal
basis/bases.
8.8

Following the amendment of the Draft Decision to take account of the EDPB’s Article 65 Decision,
WhatsApp was invited to exercise its right to be heard in relation to those aspects of the Draft
Decision in relation to which the Commission was required to make a final determination or,
otherwise, to exercise its discretion. WhatsApp furnished its submissions on these matters under
cover of letter dated 23 December 2022 (“the Final Submissions”). In response to the formulation
of the proposed order to bring processing into compliance, WhatsApp furnished extensive
submissions that were directed to the length of the proposed deadline for compliance, as follows:
a) WhatsApp has, firstly, submitted that this inquiry relates to “very different” issues to those
considered in the EDPB’s Binding Decision 1/2021 and “the magnitude of work required to
achieve compliance in this Inquiry is not comparable to that required in the WhatsApp
Transparency Inquiry.” 155
b) WhatsApp has, secondly, submitted 156 that “… work of this magnitude would generally require
a period of at least nine to eleven months to implement, albeit with some potential to expedite
aspects so that the work could conceivably be condensed into a six to nine month period.” 157
WhatsApp has provided a relatively detailed assessment of the work required to be carried
out, in this regard, and noted that the majority of the phases of work identified, “by their
nature, have to be conducted consecutively and not concurrently.”
c) WhatsApp has, thirdly, submitted 158 that if it were forced to

Final Submissions, paragraph 4.3.
Final Submissions, paragraphs 5.3 and 5.4
157
Final Submissions, paragraph 4.5 and 5.5
158
Final Submissions, paragraph 5.7
155
156

48

d) WhatsApp, fourthly, submitted 159 that the proposed compliance period is inconsistent with
the approaches taken by other supervisory authorities “in similar scenarios”, citing the
examples of a decision in which the Luxembourgish supervisory authority afforded Amazon
six months to rectify processing operations in relation to Articles 6, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 21
GDPR and a decision in which the Belgian supervisory authority afforded IAB Europe a period
of approximately eight months to bring its processing into compliance with Articles 5(1)(a)
and 6 GDPR.
e) WhatsApp, fifthly, submitted 160 that the Article 65 Decision does not require the proposed
order to take effect on “the day following the date of service of the [Commission’s] final
decision, as originally proposed. It further submitted that, were a compliance order to be
made in the terms proposed, this would require WhatsApp to dedicate its resources to
attempting to comply with that order immediately given the excessively short compliance
period. This would serious impair and prejudice [WhatsApp’s] right to an effective appeal. To
address this, WhatsApp submitted that the compliance period ought to run from the expiry
of the statutory appeal period.
8.9

Having carefully considered the above submissions, I firstly note the size and considerable
resources (both in terms of financial resourcing as well as personnel) that are available to
WhatsApp. I further note that, further to the WhatsApp Transparency Decision, the originally
proposed period for compliance with the relevant order was reduced from six to three months
further to the EDPB’s Binding Decision 1/2021, 161 notwithstanding WhatsApp’s objection to same.
I note that, despite those objections, WhatsApp achieved compliance with the order within the
reduced compliance period.

8.10

These factors notwithstanding, I cannot ignore the submissions that are summarised at
paragraphs 8.8(a), (c) and (d), above. I agree that the infringements sought to be addressed by
the within order are very different to those required to be addressed by the WhatsApp
Transparency Decision. I also consider it likely that the remedial work required to be carried out

Final Submissions, paragraph 6.3
Final Submissions, paragraphs 7.1, 7.3 and 7.4
161
Binding decision 1/2021 on the dispute arisen on the draft decision of the Irish Supervisory Authority regarding
WhatsApp Ireland under Article 65(1)(a) GDPR, adopted 28 July 2021.
159
160

49

will be more extensive and significantly more complex than the work that was required to be
carried out in the WhatsApp Transparency Decision. I have also taken account of the position, as
regards the matters set out at paragraph 8.8(d), above. I further note the risks potentially
associated with a position whereby WhatsApp is forced to make changes without adequate time
to consider the consequences of those changes, as outlined at paragraph 8.8(c), above. Given
that the objective sought to be achieved by the order is the protection of the fundamental rights
and freedoms of data subjects, it would undermine that protection if, as a result of an inadequate
period for compliance, data subjects were put at risk of other harms, such as those that might be
presented by bad actors.
8.11

In the circumstances, I am persuaded that it is necessary for me to increase the previously
proposed deadline for compliance, from a period of three to six months, commencing on the day
following the date of service of this Decision on WhatsApp. This extension takes account of the
significant financial, technological and human resources at WhatsApp’s disposal. It further
reflects the shortest period of time for compliance identified by WhatsApp in its submissions and,
in these circumstances, it reflects a good balance, as between the need to protect the
fundamental rights and freedoms of data subjects by bringing about the required changes to
WhatsApp’s processing of personal data and WhatsApp’s entitlement to be made subject to
measures that are no more than necessary to achieve the stated objective.

8.12

For the avoidance of doubt, I am not persuaded by the submissions summarised at paragraph
8.8(e), above. I note, in this regard, that WhatsApp has not explained how a shorter timeline for
compliance would “seriously impair and prejudice” its right to an effective appeal. I further note
that matters pertaining to the possible filing of any appeal will likely be dealt with by WhatsApp’s
internal and external legal advisors as opposed to the various technologists whose input will be
required as part of WhatsApp’s efforts to achieve compliance with the terms of the order. While
I anticipate that there will, of course, be overlap in terms of the resources that might need to
devote time to both the required remedial action and matters pertaining to the possible filing of
any appeal, I do not envisage how such overlap would be anywhere near total such as to give rise
to a risk to WhatsApp’s ability to exercise its right to an effective appeal. I further note that the
compliance deadline extends significantly beyond the limitation periods prescribed for any
application for judicial redress under Irish law. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that
WhatsApp’s right to pursue judicial redress will not be impaired by the compliance period outlined
above.

8.13

Accordingly, and having taken account of WhatsApp’s submissions, the Commission will include,
as part of this Decision, an order requiring WhatsApp to bring its processing operations into
compliance, in the terms outlined at paragraph 8.7 above, within a period of six months,
commencing on the day following the date of service of this Decision on WhatsApp.

50

9

ADMINISTRATIVE FINE

9.1

The Article 65 Decision further includes a requirement for the Commission to impose an
administrative fine in response to the EDPB’s finding of infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR, as
follows:
305. The EDPB concurs that the decision to impose an administrative fine needs to be taken
on a case-by-case basis in light of the circumstances and is not an automatic one. However,
the EDPB recalls that when a violation of the Regulation has been established, competent
supervisory authorities are required to react appropriately to remedy this infringement in
accordance with the means provided to them by Article 58(2) GDPR, which includes the
possible imposition of an administrative fine pursuant to Article 58(2)(i) GDPR.
306. Indeed, as already mentioned the consistency mechanism may also be used to promote
a consistent application of administrative fines: where a relevant and reasoned objection
identifies shortcomings in the reasoning leading to the imposition of the fine at stake (or
naturally the lack of one), the EDPB can instruct the LSA to engage in a new assessment of the
need for a fine or the calculation of a proposed fine.
307. The EDPB again wants to recall that although the supervisory authority must determine
which action is appropriate and necessary and take into consideration all the circumstances of
the processing of personal data in question in that determination, the supervisory authority is
nevertheless required to execute its responsibility for ensuring that the GDPR is fully enforced
with all due diligence. Recital 148 shows the duty for supervisory authorities to impose
corrective measures that are proportionate to the seriousness of the infringement.
308. With respect to the imposition of an administrative fine, the EDPB recalls the
requirements of Article 83(1) GDPR, as well as that due account must be given to the elements
of Article 83(2) GDPR.
309. As already established the EDPB considers the lawfulness of processing to be one of the
fundamental pillars of the data protection law and that processing of personal data without an
appropriate legal basis is a clear and serious violation of the data subjects’ fundamental right
to data protection. The EDPB therefore agrees with the FR SA in considering the identified
breach as serious.
Furthermore, the EDPB takes the view that the infringement at issue relates to the processing
of personal data of a significant number of people in a cross-border scope and that the impact
on them has to be considered.
310. The EDPB underlines that the specific circumstances of the case have to be reflected. Such
circumstances not only refer to the specific elements of the infringement, but also those of the
controller or processor who committed the infringement, namely its size and financial position.
311. Though the damage is very difficult to express in terms of a monetary value, it remains
the case that data subjects have been faced with data processing that should not have
51

occurred (by relying inappropriately on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR as a legal basis as established in
section 4.4.2). The data processing in question entails decisions about information that data
subjects are exposed to or excluded from receiving. The EDPB recalls that non-material
damage is explicitly regarded as relevant in recital 75 GDPR and that such damage may result
from situations “where data subjects might be deprived of their rights and freedoms or
prevented from exercising control over their personal data”. Given the nature and gravity of
the infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR, a risk of damage caused to data subjects is, in such
circumstances, consubstantial with the finding of the infringement itself.
312. In the light of the nature and gravity of the infringement pursuant to Article 83(2)(a)
GDPR as identified in the paragraphs above, in the view of the EDPB the combination of the
mentioned factors already clearly tip the balance in favour of imposing an administrative fine.
313. For conduct infringing data protection rules, the GDPR does not provide for a minimum
fine. Rather, the GDPR only provides for maximum amounts in Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR, in which
several different types of conduct are grouped together. A fine can ultimately only be
calculated by weighing up all the elements expressly identified in Article 83(2)(a)–(j) GDPR,
relevant to the case and any other relevant elements, even if not explicitly listed in the said
provisions (as Article 83(2)(k) GDPR requires to give due regard to any other applicable factor).
Finally, the final amount of the fine resulting from this assessment must be effective,
proportionate and dissuasive in each individual case (Article 83(1) GDPR). Any fine imposed
must sufficiently take into account all of these parameters, whilst at the same time not
exceeding the legal maximum provided for in Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR.
314. In light of the above, the EDPB instructs the IE SA to impose an administrative fine,
remaining in line with the criteria provided for by Article 83(2) GDPR and ensuring it is effective,
proportionate and dissuasive in line with Article 83(1) GDPR, in accordance with the
conclusions reached by the EDPB, namely the identified infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR.

9.2

The Article 65 Decision further provides, in relation to the infringement that was found to have
occurred of the Article 5(1)(a) fairness principle, that:
315. The EDPB recalls its conclusion in this Binding Decision on the infringement by WhatsApp
IE of the fairness principle under Article 5(1)(a) GDPR and that the objection raised by the IT
SA, which is found to be relevant and reasoned, requested the IE SA to exercise its power to
impose an administrative fine.
316. The EDPB takes note of WhatsApp IE’s view that the IT SA objection is not relevant and
reasoned and also notes that WhatsApp IE takes that view that inappropriate, clearly
disproportionate, and unnecessary to impose an administrative fine.
317. The EDPB again recalls that the decision to impose an administrative fine needs to be
taken on a case-by-case basis in light of the circumstances and is not an automatic one and the
specificities of the case have to be taken into account.
52

318. As previously established, the principle of fairness under Article 5(1)(a) GDPR, although
intrinsically linked to the principles of lawfulness and transparency under the same provision,
has an independent meaning.
319. Considering the EDPB’s findings in Section 5.4.2 that WhatsApp IE has not complied with
key requirements of the principle of fairness, the EDPB reiterates its view that WhatsApp IE
has infringed the principle of fairness under Article 5(1)(a) GDPR and agrees with the IT SA that
this infringement should be adequately taken into account by the IE SA in the calculation of
the amount of the administrative fine to be imposed following the conclusion of this inquiry.
320. Therefore, the EDPB instructs the IE SA to take into account the infringement by
WhatsApp IE of the fairness principle enshrined in Article 5(1)(a) GDPR as established above
when determining the fine for the violation of Article 6(1) GDPR as instructed above. If,
however, the IE SA considers an additional fine for the breach of the principle of fairness is an
appropriate corrective measure, the EDPB requests the IE SA to include this in its final decision.
In any case, the IE SA must take into account the criteria provided for by Article 83(2) GDPR
and ensuring it is effective, proportionate and dissuasive in line with Article 83(1) GDPR.

9.3

For the avoidance of doubt, the Commission does not consider an additional fine for the breach
of the principle of fairness that was established by the Article 65 Decision to be an appropriate
corrective measure. The Commission notes, in this regard, that the EDPB’s finding of infringement
of the Article 5(1)(a) fairness principle was largely based on the lack of transparency, as regards
the information that was presented to the data subject concerning the processing that would be
carried out further to the Terms of Service (see, for example, paragraph 154 of the Article 65
Decision). The Commission previously imposed administrative fines totalling €225 million on
WhatsApp by way of the WhatsApp Transparency Decision, arising from findings of infringement
of Articles 5(1)(a), 12, 13 and 14 GDPR. Those findings of infringement concerned the same
privacy policy referenced by the EDPB in its Article 65 Decision. In the circumstances, the
imposition of a fine for the finding of infringement of the Article 5(1)(a) fairness principle would
risk punishing WhatsApp twice for the same wrongdoing.

“THE PROCESSING CONCERNED”
9.4

For the purpose of the following assessment of the Article 83(2) criteria, “the processing
concerned” should be understood as meaning the processing carried out by WhatsApp for the
purpose of service improvement and security features (excluding “IT Security”, as described in
paragraph 90 of the Article 65 Decision) in the context of its Terms of Service. This reflects the
scope of the finding of infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR, as set out in paragraph 122 of the Article
65 Decision.

53

ARTICLE 83(2)(A): THE NATURE, GRAVITY AND DURATION OF THE INFRINGEMENT TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE NATURE
SCOPE OR PURPOSE OF THE PROCESSING CONCERNED AS WELL AS THE NUMBER OF DATA SUBJECTS AFFECTED AND THE LEVEL
OF DAMAGE SUFFERED BY THEM:

Nature
9.5

Paragraph 309 of the Article 65 Decision records the EDPB’s view that:
“As already established the EDPB considers the lawfulness of processing to be one of the
fundamental pillars of the data protection law and that processing of personal data without an
appropriate legal basis is a clear and serious violation of the data subjects’ fundamental right
to data protection. The EDPB therefore agrees with the FR SA in considering the identified
breach as serious.”

9.6

It is therefore clear that the EDPB considers the Article 6(1) infringement to concern one of the
“fundamental pillars” of the GDPR. The Commission further notes, in this regard, that paragraphs
312 and 328(14) of the Article 65 Decision indicate that the EDPB considered the nature of the
infringement to be significant, in the context of its conclusion that an administrative fine ought to
be imposed in relation to the infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR.

Gravity
9.7

The Article 65 Decision does not identify, with any particularisation, the EDPB’s position on the
gravity of the Article 6(1) infringement. The Commission notes, however, that paragraphs 312
and 328(14) of the Article 65 Decision indicate that the EDPB considered the gravity of the
infringement to be significant, in the context of its conclusion that an administrative fine ought to
be imposed in relation to the infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR.

9.8

The Commission, for its part, notes that infringements of Article 6 are subject to the higher fining
threshold set out in Article 83(5) GDPR. The maximum fine prescribed by Article 83(5) GDPR is
twice that prescribed by Article 83(4) GDPR. This arrangement clearly indicates that the legislator
considered the matters covered by Article 83(5) GDPR to be particularly significant in the context
of the data protection framework as a whole.

Duration
9.9

The Article 65 Decision does not contain any indication in relation to the manner in which the
EDPB took account of the duration of the Article 6(1) infringement. The Commission notes that
the infringement has occurred since 25 May 2018 and remains ongoing.

Number of data subjects affected
54

9.10

Paragraph 309 of the Article 65 Decision records the EDPB’s view that:
“the infringement at issue relates to the processing of personal data of a significant number of
people in a cross-border scope …”

Level of damage suffered by them
9.11

Paragraph 311 of the Article 65 Decision records that:
“Though the damage is very difficult to express in terms of a monetary value, it remains the
case that data subjects have been faced with data processing that should not have occurred …
. The data processing in question entails decisions about information that data subjects are
exposed to or excluded from receiving. The EDPB recalls that non-material damage is explicitly
regarded as relevant in Recital 75 and that such damage may result from situations “where
data subjects might be deprived of their rights and freedoms or prevented from exercising
control over their personal data”. Given the nature and gravity of the infringement of Article
6(1) GDPR, a risk of damage caused to data subjects is, in such circumstances, consubstantial
with the finding of the infringement itself.”

9.12

Paragraph 120 of the Article 65 Decision considers the risks arising from the Article 6(1)
infringement as follows:
“Some of the safeguards from which data subjects would be deprived due to an inappropriate
use of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR as legal basis, instead of others such as consent under Article 6(1)(a)
GDPR and legitimate interest under Article 6(1)(f) GDPR, are the possibility to specifically
consent to certain processing operations and not to others and to the further processing of their
personal data (Article 6(4) GDPR; their freedom to withdraw consent (Article 7 GDPR); their
right to be forgotten (Article 17 GDPR); and the balancing exercise of the legitimate interests of
the controller against their interests or fundamental rights and freedoms (Article 6(1)(f) GDPR).”

9.13

It therefore appears that the EDPB considered the infringement to give rise to a risk of loss of
control over, and ability to exercise choice concerning, one’s personal data. This is consistent with
the complainant’s position that the infringement had the effect of negating her free will (see point
ii, page 16 of the complaint).

9.14

The Commission notes, in this regard, that Recital 75 (which acts as an aid to the interpretation
of Article 24 GDPR, the provision that addresses the responsibility of the controller), describes the
“damage” that can result where processing does not accord with the requirements of the GDPR:
“The risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons, of varying likelihood and severity,
may result from personal data processing which could lead to physical, material or nonmaterial damage, in particular: … where data subjects might be deprived of their rights
55

and freedoms or prevented from exercising control over their personal data …”
[emphasis added]
9.15

The Commission further considers that the infringement of the Article 5(1)(a) fairness principle
may be taken into account, as required by the Article 65 Decision, under this particular heading.
The Commission notes, in this regard, paragraph 153 of the Article 65 Decision, which records the
EDPB’s position that:
“ … the EDPB shares the IT SA’s concern that WhatsApp IE misrepresented the legal basis of the
processing and that WhatsApp IE’s users are left “in the dark” as to the possible connections
between the purposes sought, the applicable legal basis and the relevant processing activities.
This being said, the EDPB considers that the processing by WhatsApp IE cannot be regarded as
ethical and truthful because it is confusing with regard to the type of data processed, the legal
basis used and the purposes of the processing, which ultimately restricts the WhatsApp IE’s
users’ possibility to exercise their data subjects’ rights.”

9.16

On the basis of the views that have been expressed by the EDPB, as recorded above, the
Commission concludes that the infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR falls within the upper range of
the scale, in terms of seriousness, for the purpose of the assessment of the Article 83(2)(a)
criterion

WhatsApp’s Final Submissions in response to the assessment of the Article 6(1) infringement for the
purpose of Article 83(2) GDPR, as introduced to this Decision following the adoption of the Article 65
Decision
9.17

As noted previously, following the amendment of the Draft Decision to take account of the EDPB’s
Article 65 Decision, WhatsApp was invited to exercise its right to be heard in relation to those
aspects of the Draft Decision in relation to which the Commission was required to make a final
determination or, otherwise, to exercise its discretion. WhatsApp furnished its submissions on
these matters under cover of letter dated 23 December 2022 (“the Final Submissions”).

9.18

In relation to the nature of the Article 6(1) infringement, WhatsApp “respectfully [urged] the
[Commission] not to rely on the EDPB’s erroneous decision with respect to Article 83(2)(a) GDPR,
in light of [identified] significant errors in the EDPB’s reasoning. 162” WhatsApp further submitted,
in this regard, that the EDPB’s conclusion was “not correct and not supported by the evidence” 163.

9.19

WhatsApp further submitted 164 that it has “at all times relied openly and in good faith on Article
6(1)(b) GDPR in respect of the Processing and was supported, in principle, in this reliance by the

Final Submissions, paragraph 10.4
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.6
164
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.6
162
163

56

initial findings of the [Commission]. [WhatsApp’s] good faith reliance on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in
these circumstances must be regarded as a very significant mitigating factor. It was only during
the Article 60 GDPR process that a difference of view emerged between the [Commission] and
CSAs regarding Article 6(1)(b) GDPR which required resolution by the EDPB.” Furthermore, it
submitted 165 that the “Article 65 Decision also relies on the Contractual Necessity Guidelines.
However, these guidelines do not address security related processing. Furthermore, the Guidelines
should not be relied on at all in circumstances where they were not adopted until after this Inquiry
commenced. To the extent that guidance postdating the commencement of the Inquiry is being
used to retrospectively characterise the nature of the purported infringement, this is
fundamentally unfair and in breach of legal certainty.”
9.20

In circumstances where the Article 65 Decision is binding upon the Commission, I am not in a
position to act contrary to, or otherwise look behind, the views that have been so expressed the
EDPB. The EDPB has clearly set out its views, in this regard, at paragraph 309 of the Article 65
Decision, as quoted above. In the circumstances, I cannot consider the infringement as being
anything less than serious in nature.

9.21

In relation to the gravity of the Article 6(1) infringement, WhatsApp submitted166 that it would be
inappropriate for the Commission, in reaching its own determination to afford any weight to the
EDPB’s decision on gravity of the infringement. Furthermore, the inclusion of reference to Article
6 GDPR in the list of infringements that are covered by the higher of the two fining “cap”
provisions “cannot justify a finding of significant gravity in this instance” in circumstances where
Article 83 requires this assessment to take account of the relevant factors in “each individual
case 167”. WhatsApp submitted 168, in this regard, that the gravity of the infringement should
properly be characterised as minor, taking into account the fact that: (i) the processing is not
intrusive in nature; (ii) limited categories of data are processed by WhatsApp to provide the
WhatsApp Service; and (iii) the processing at issue was conducted for the purpose of keeping data
subjects safe and providing them with a product that met their expectations.

9.22

WhatsApp further considered it “significant” that neither the Commission nor the Article 65
Decision prohibit it from engaging in the processing – either on a temporary or permanent basis.
“Rather, they require WhatsApp to identify an appropriate legal basis for the processing. It is
respectfully submitted that, with this factual context in mind, the gravity of the infringement in
this instance cannot be on the upper end of the potential infringements that could fall within the
broad categories laid out in Article 83(5). 169”

Final Submissions, paragraph 10.6
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.9
167
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.11
168
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.12
169
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.13
165
166

57

9.23

As before, the Commission is not in a position to act contrary to the views that have been clearly
expressed by the EDPB in its binding Article 65 Decision. As already acknowledged, the EDPB has
not elaborated on the reasons why it considers the gravity of the Article 6(1) infringement to be
one of the factors that tip the balance in favour of the imposition of a fine. This does not alter the
fact, however, that the EDPB clearly considered the gravity of the Article 6(1) infringement to be
of one of the factors that warranted the imposition of an administrative fine. In these
circumstances, it is not open to the Commission to conclude that the gravity of the infringement
is not significant, in terms of its impact on the overall assessment of the Article 83(2)(a) criterion.

9.24

Furthermore, it is appropriate for the Commission to have regard to the placement of an
infringement, as between the infringements that are subject to Article 83(4) GDPR and those that
are subject to Article 83(5) GDPR, in circumstances where this placement provides insight into the
thinking of the EU legislator, as regards the gravity of infringements of particular provisions.

9.25

In relation to the significance of the absence of a ban on processing, the Commission notes that
the purpose of an administrative fine is to sanction wrongdoing that has occurred. Measures such
as a ban or an order to bring processing into compliance, however, serve a different purpose in
that they are directed to addressing the wrongdoing on a forward-looking basis. Furthermore,
when exercising corrective powers, supervisory authorities should not exceed what is necessary
to achieve the stated objective. As noted above, the EDPB, in the Article 65 Decision, directed the
Commission to address the Article 6(1) infringement by making an order to bring processing into
compliance and to impose an administrative fine. Those directions reflect the EDPB’s view that
such measures do not exceed what is necessary to address the infringements that were found to
have occurred. It would be incorrect, however, to equate the choice of measures as being
indicative of the EDPB’s position on the gravity of the infringements themselves. In the
circumstances, and notwithstanding the absence of a ban, it cannot be suggested that the EDPB
considered the infringement to be “minor”, as suggested by WhatsApp.

9.26

In relation to the duration of the Article 6(1) infringement, WhatsApp has submitted that the
duration of the infringement “… should not be considered to support the conclusion that the
infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR falls within the ‘upper range of the scale”, in terms of
seriousness. 170 In the absence of any specific direction from the EDPB, in this regard, the
Commission has not allocated this factor with any significant weight, in terms of its impact on the
overall assessment of the Article 83(2)(a) criterion.

9.27

In relation to the number of data subjects affected and the level of damage suffered by them,
WhatsApp has submitted that:

170

Final Submissions, paragraph 10.16.

58

•

“the [Commission] should not rely on paragraph 309 of the Article 65 Decision where it states
that “the infringement at issue relates to the processing of personal data of a significant
number of people in a cross-border scope … ” given that no investigation has been carried out
by either the [Commission] or the EDPB as to the relevant Processing or in turn how many data
subjects are impacted 171”

•

“the only data subject who is relevant for the purpose of Article 83(2)(a) is the data subject
represented by the Complainant and any consideration of the level of damage suffered is
confined to a consideration of any damage the Complainant may have suffered. At no point in
the Inquiry has the Complainant offered any evidence to demonstrate that the data subject
represented by it has suffered damage, and no evidence of any such damage has otherwise
been adduced in the Inquiry. 172”

•

“… even if it is open to the [Commission] to consider whether other data subjects have been
affected and to have regard to any damage suffered by them, there is no evidence whatsoever
in this Inquiry that any other data subjects have suffered any damage. To the contrary, the
Processing was conducted for the purposes of keeping the service users signed up for safe and
evolving to meet their expectations 173.”

9.28

In response to the above submissions, it is, firstly, important to note that the Commission is
subject to a binding decision of the EDPB, which includes an assessment of the damage suffered
by data subjects, at paragraph 311 thereof. In the circumstances, it is not open to the Commission
to find that no damage has been suffered. Secondly, the Complainant herself identified the
damage that she alleges to have suffered in connection with the matters which formed the basis
for the EDPB’s findings of infringement of Article 6(1) and the Article 5(1)(a) principle of fairness.
Thirdly, as regards the damage suffered by data subjects other than the Complainant, the matters
covered by the findings of infringement are not matters on which any individual user of WhatsApp
has the power to exercise choice (other than, of course, the choice to use WhatsApp or not).
Where any individual data subject chooses to use WhatsApp, the basic processing that takes place
(the subject of the within Inquiry) is the same as that applied to the personal data of the
Complainant. In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the identified damage suffered, i.e.
loss of control over one’s personal data, is limited to the Complainant alone. For these reasons, it
is appropriate for the Commission to take account of the damage suffered by all user data subjects
as part of the Article 83(2) assessment.

9.29

Having taken account of the Final Submissions, I remain of the view that the infringement of
Article 6(1) GDPR falls within the upper range of the scale, in terms of seriousness, for the purpose
of the assessment of the Article 83(2)(a) criterion.

Final Submissions, paragraph 10.18
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.19
173
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.20
171
172

59

ARTICLE 83(2)(B): INTENTIONAL OR NEGLIGENT CHARACTER OF INFRINGEMENT
9.30

The EDPB (in the Article 65 Decision) has not addressed this aspect of matters. The Commission
notes that, at paragraph 56 its Fining Guidelines 04/2022, the EDPB restates the position that “in
general, intent includes both knowledge and wilfulness in relation to the characteristics of an
offence, whereas “unintentional” means that there was no intention to cause the infringement
although the controller/processor breached the duty of care which is required in the law.”

9.31

The Fining Guidelines, at paragraph 57, further provide that “(t)he intentional or negligent
character of the infringement … should be assessed taking into account the objective elements of
conduct gathered from the facts of the case.”

9.32

There is nothing, in the EDPB’s assessment of the objective elements of conduct gathered from
the facts of the case, to suggest that the Article 6(1) GDPR infringement was intentional on the
part of WhatsApp. In the circumstances, the Commission considers the infringement to be
negligent in character. The Commission notes the views expressed by the EDPB in its Fining
Guidelines 04/2022, that “(a)t best, negligence could be regarded as neutral” and, accordingly,
the Commission proposes to treat this factor as neither mitigating nor aggravating.

WhatsApp’s Final Submissions in response to the assessment of the Article 6(1) infringement for the
purpose of Article 83(2) GDPR, as introduced to this Decision following the adoption of the Article 65
Decision
9.33

By way of the Final Submissions, WhatsApp relies in part on its submissions on the nature of the
infringement, which I have considered in the context of my analysis of Article 83(2)(a) GDPR
above. WhatsApp also submitted that:
“… it became clear in the course of the Article 60 process that there was a reasonably held
difference of views between the [Commission] and certain of the CSAs regarding Article
6(1)(b) GDPR which required resolution by the EDPB. Where there is such a clear
disagreement as to the correct interpretation and/or application of Article 6(1) GDPR – for
example, where supervisory authorities themselves disagree as to the approach adopted
– any subsequent finding of infringement should not be characterised as negligent.” 174

9.34

174
175

In reliance on the above, WhatsApp submitted175 that this alleged lack of negligence ought to be
recognised in this Decision and the fine reduced accordingly.

Final Submissions, paragraph 10.26.
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.27

60

9.35

While I acknowledge WhatsApp’s position, in this regard, I am bound to adopt this Decision in a
manner that is consistent with the views that have been expressed by the EDPB in the Article 65
Decision. I note, in this regard, that the EDPB placed reliance 176 on guidance that it issued in
2019 177, as part of the assessment the resulted in a finding of infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR.

9.36

In the circumstances, and acknowledging WhatsApp’s genuinely held view, I do not believe that
it would be consistent with the Article 65 Decision for me to conclude that the infringement ought
properly to be classified as neither negligent nor intentional in character simply because of a
genuinely held belief, on the part of WhatsApp, in its entitlement to rely on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR
to carry out the processing concerned. The references to the 2019 guidelines in the Article 65
Decision indicate that the EDPB considers its position on the matter to have been clear since that
time. I am further of the view that, had the EDPB considered the infringement to be neither
negligent nor intentional in character, this would have been reflected in the determination, by
the EDPB, that resulted in the direction that required the imposition of an administrative fine. My
view, in this regard, is that an infringement which has been characterised as neither intentional
nor negligent would likely weigh heavily against the question of whether, by reference to Article
83(2), the imposition of an administrative fine might be warranted in the circumstances of a
particular case.

9.37

For the reasons outlined above, I am not satisfied that it would be appropriate for me, in the
circumstances of this Decision, to depart from the position reflected in the EDPB’s Fining
Guidelines 04/2022, that “(a)t best, negligence could be regarded as neutral”. Accordingly, and
having considered WhatsApp’s position on the matter, I remain of the view that the infringement
ought properly to be characterised as negligent and that this factor is neither mitigating nor
aggravating in the circumstances of the case.

ARTICLE 83(2)(C): ANY ACTION TAKEN BY THE CONTROLLER TO MITIGATE THE DAMAGE SUFFERED BY DATA SUBJECTS
9.38

The EDPB (in the Article 65 Decision) has not addressed this aspect of matters. The Commission
notes that WhatsApp, throughout the course of the inquiry, considered that it was entitled to
process personal data for service improvement and security purposes in reliance on Article 6(1)(b)
GDPR. That being the case, it follows that WhatsApp could not have been expected to take action
“to mitigate the damage suffered by data subjects” in circumstances where WhatsApp did not
consider any infringement to have occurred or any damage to have been suffered by data
subjects. In the circumstances, the Commission considers this factor to be neither aggravating
nor mitigating.

See, for example, paragraphs 104 and 112 of the Article 65 Decision
EDPB Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the
provision of online services to data subjects, Version 2.0, 8 October 2019
176
177

61

WhatsApp’s Final Submissions in response to the assessment of the Article 6(1) infringement for the
purpose of Article 83(2) GDPR, as introduced to this Decision following the adoption of the Article 65
Decision
9.39

By way of the Final Submissions, WhatsApp has urged me to take account of various mitigating
matters, namely that:
“(i) at all relevant times WhatsApp Ireland believed, and had a reasonable basis to believe,
that reliance on Article 6(1)(b) was appropriate in principle; (ii) there is no evidence of any
damage to data subjects; and (iii) WhatsApp Ireland made a number of changes to
improve transparency for users to the satisfaction of the [Commission] and CSAs (which
the EDPB alleges underpins the Article 6(1) infringement)”.178

9.40

On the basis of the above, WhatsApp has submitted 179 that this should be treated as a mitigating
factor.

9.41

I note that I have already addressed WhatsApp’s submissions concerning the absence of evidence
of damage, as part of the Article 83(2)(a) GDPR assessment. In relation to the identified changes
made to improve transparency for users, I note that WhatsApp was subject to an obligation to
make those changes (by virtue of the order made pursuant to the WhatsApp Transparency
Decision). As regards the significance of those changes in the context of the infringement of
Article 6(1) under assessment, it is clear (from the Article 65 Decision) that the rectification of the
transparency deficits that were identified by the WhatsApp Transparency Decision do not address
the damage suffered by data subjects arising from the Article 6(1) infringement (as considered
within the Article 83(2)(a) criterion, above). In the circumstances, I am unable to take account of
such matters as mitigating factors in relation to the mitigation of damage suffered by data
subjects as a result of the infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR.

9.42

Accordingly, and having considered WhatsApp’s position in this regard, I remain of the view that
this factor ought to be treated as neither mitigating nor aggravating for the reasons set out at
paragraph 9.38, above.

ARTICLE 83(2)(D): THE DEGREE OF RESPONSIBILITY OF THE CONTROLLER, TAKING INTO ACCOUNT TECHNICAL AND
ORGANISATIONAL MEASURES IMPLEMENTED BY THEM PURSUANT TO ARTICLES 25 AND 32
9.43

178
179

The EDPB (in the Article 65 Decision) has not addressed this aspect of matters. Given that the
extent to which WhatsApp might comply with its obligations pursuant to Articles 25 and 32 was
not required to be examined by the inquiry, the Commission considers this factor to be neither

Final Submissions, paragraph 10.29.
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.29

62

mitigating nor aggravating. WhatsApp, by way of the Final Submissions, confirmed 180 its
agreement with the above approach. In the circumstances, I conclude that this factor is neither
mitigating nor aggravating.
ARTICLE 83(2)(E): ANY RELEVANT PREVIOUS INFRINGEMENTS BY THE CONTROLLER
9.44

The EDPB (in the Article 65 Decision) has not addressed this aspect of matters. The Commission
notes the findings of infringement previously recorded against WhatsApp in the Transparency
Decision. That decision concerned an in-depth assessment of the extent to which WhatsApp
complied with its transparency obligations and recorded findings of infringement of Articles
5(1)(a), 12, 13 and 14 GDPR. The Commission notes, however, the overlap in temporal scope and
subject matter, as between that decision and the within one. The Commission notes, in particular,
the fact that the Transparency Decision was the result of an own-volition inquiry that was
commenced at the same time as the inquiry underlying this decision. The fact that there are
previous infringements in existence is a consequence of the fact that the inquiry underlying the
Transparency Decision reached completion ahead of the within inquiry. The Commission’s view
is that the word “previous” in the text of Article 83(2)(e) indicates a requirement for temporal
separation between the conduct giving rise to a previously established finding of infringement
and the conduct under present assessment. The infringements established by the Transparency
Decision do not reflect earlier offending on the part of WhatsApp. In these particular
circumstances, and without prejudice to the question of whether or not the infringements
recorded in the Transparency Decision are “relevant” for the purpose of Article 83(2)(e) GDPR,
the Commission considers this factor to be neither mitigating nor aggravating.

WhatsApp’s Final Submissions in response to the assessment of the Article 6(1) infringement for the
purpose of Article 83(2) GDPR, as introduced to this Decision following the adoption of the Article 65
Decision
9.45

WhatsApp, by way of the Final Submissions, disagrees with the above and, instead, urges the
Commission to treat this factor as mitigating, in line with the Commission’s approach in other
(named) inquiries. 181 I note, in this regard, that the named inquiries do not concern cross-border
processing.

9.46

In response to the above, the Commission is not required to apply the same approach across all
of its inquiries. The Commission’s approach to the presence or absence of relevant previous
infringements (for the purpose of the Article 83(2)(e) GDPR assessment) differs, depending, inter
alia, on the contexts of different types of controllers and, in particular, the scale of the processing
at issue. Unlike the position with the smaller-scale domestic inquiries that WhatsApp has cited as
examples, inquiries into larger internet platforms generally concern data controllers or processors

180
181

Final Submissions, paragraph 10.30.
Final Submissions, paragraphs 10.31-10.33.

63

with multi-national operations and significant resources available to them, including large, inhouse, compliance teams. Such entitles are further likely to be engaged in business activities that
are uniquely dependent on the large-scale processing of personal data. The Commission’s view is
that the size and scale of such entities, the level of dependency on data processing and the
extensive resources that are available to them necessitate a different approach to the absence of
previous relevant infringements. That approach has been reflected in the decisions that have
been cited by WhatsApp in support of its submission. I note, in this regard, that WhatsApp’s
submissions do not reference the Commission’s decision in the Twitter (breach notification)
inquiry, nor the Commission’s decision in the WhatsApp Transparency Decision, nor the Facebook
(12 breaches) inquiry. The Commission’s approach to the Article 83(2) GDPR assessment, as
recorded in these decisions (amongst others), is consistent with that applied to the within inquiry.
Accordingly, I remain of the view that this factor ought to be treated as neither mitigating nor
aggravating.
ARTICLE 83(2)(F): THE DEGREE OF COOPERATION WITH THE SUPERVISORY AUTHORITY, IN ORDER TO REMEDY THE
INFRINGEMENT AND MITIGATE THE POSSIBLE ADVERSE EFFECTS OF THE INFRINGEMENT

9.47

The EDPB (in the Article 65 Decision) has not addressed this aspect of matters. In the
circumstances, the Commission proposes to consider this factor to be neither mitigating nor
aggravating for the same reasons set out in the Article 83(2)(c) assessment, above.

WhatsApp’s Final Submissions in response to the assessment of the Article 6(1) infringement for the
purpose of Article 83(2) GDPR, as introduced to this Decision following the adoption of the Article 65
Decision
9.48

By way of the Final Submissions, WhatsApp has submitted that I should treat this factor as
mitigating in light of the fact that it has taken “… various steps (along with its historic approach of
voluntary engagement and cooperation with the [Commission] to improve transparency for its
users…and will undertake all efforts to comply with any order issued by the [Commission], as
required.” 182 WhatsApp further submits that it has also cooperated fully with the Commission
throughout the Inquiry.

9.49

While the Commission recognises that WhatsApp has cooperated fully throughout the Inquiry,
the Commission notes that WhatsApp is obliged to do so by virtue of Article 31 GDPR.
Furthermore, and while the Commission acknowledges WhatsApp’s commitment to undertake
“all efforts to comply with any order” that might be issued further to this Decision, I again note
that WhatsApp is subject to an obligation to comply with the terms of the relevant order. In
relation to the steps taken to improve transparency for users, I note that I have already addressed
such submissions further to the Article 83(2)(c), above.

182

Final Submissions, paragraph 10.35.

64

9.50

Accordingly, I remain of the view that this factor ought to be treated as neither mitigating nor
aggravating.

ARTICLE 83(2)(G): THE CATEGORIES OF PERSONAL DATA AFFECTED BY THE INFRINGEMENT
9.51

The EDPB (in the Article 65 Decision) has not addressed this aspect of matters. The Commission
notes, further to the corresponding assessment in the Transparency Decision, that the categories
of personal data that WhatsApp processes for the purpose of delivering its service are not
extensive. The Commission is cognisant, however, of the fact that the inquiry underlying this
decision did not include an examination of the specific categories of personal data bring processed
by WhatsApp for service improvement and security purposes. In the circumstances, the
Commission proposes to consider this factor as a mitigating factor of the lightest possible weight.

WhatsApp’s Final Submissions in response to the assessment of the Article 6(1) infringement for the
purpose of Article 83(2) GDPR, as introduced to this Decision following the adoption of the Article 65
Decision
9.52

By way of the Final Submissions, WhatsApp submits that greater mitigating weight should be
afforded to this factor. 183 It submits that the Commission “… has not specifically investigated the
categories of personal data affected by the Processing, and so the basis for its conclusion is
unclear.” 184 WhatsApp further submits that the processing in question is not intrusive, and that it
is not capable of giving rise to damage, both in light of the limited categories of data being
processed, and “… various privacy-protective measures it has in place, such as end-to-end
encryption. 185.

9.53

As already acknowledged, the scope of the complaint, as originally assessed by the Commission,
did not necessitate investigation of the specific processing operations or categories of personal
data undergoing processing. This notwithstanding, the Commission considers that it can discern
sufficient information from the Privacy Policy to sustain the conclusion proposed above that the
categories of personal data affected by the Article 6(1) GPDR infringement are not extensive. Such
a conclusion is also consistent with the outcome of the same assessment, as reflected in the
WhatsApp Transparency Decision (noting that the same Privacy Policy underpinned both the
WhatsApp Transparency Decision and this Decision).

9.54

As regards WhatsApp’s submission that I should afford greater mitigating weight to this factor, I
note that WhatsApp has not provided me with any basis that would enable me to do so. While I
acknowledge its submissions considering the various “privacy-protective measures” it has in

Final submissions, paragraph 10.37.
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.38.
185
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.39.
183
184

65

place, the focus of Article 83(2)(g) is the “categories” of personal data affected by the
infringement. In the absence of submissions directed to this specific point, I remain of the view
that this factor ought to be treated as a mitigating factor of the lightest possible weight.
ARTICLE 83(2)(H): THE MANNER IN WHICH THE INFRINGEMENT BECAME KNOWN TO THE SUPERVISORY AUTHORITY, IN
PARTICULAR WHETHER, AND IF SO TO WHAT EXTENT, THE CONTROLLER NOTIFIED THE INFRINGEMENT
9.55

The EDPB (in the Article 65 Decision) has not addressed this aspect of matters. The Commission
notes that the subject-matter of the inquiry did not give rise to any obligation on the part of
WhatsApp to make a formal notification to the Commission. Accordingly, the Commission
proposes to consider this factor as neither mitigating nor aggravating. WhatsApp, by way of the
Final Submissions, confirmed 186 its agreement with the above approach. In the circumstances, I
conclude that this factor is neither mitigating nor aggravating.

ARTICLE 83(2)(I): WHERE MEASURES REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 58(2) HAVE PREVIOUSLY BEEN ORDERED AGAINST THE
CONTROLLER CONCERNED WITH REGARD TO THE SAME SUBJECT-MATTER, COMPLIANCE WITH THOSE MEASURES
9.56

The EDPB (in the Article 65 Decision) has not addressed this aspect of matters. The Commission
notes that measures have not previously been ordered against WhatsApp with regard to the same
subject matter. In the circumstances, the Commission proposes to consider this factor as neither
mitigating nor aggravating. WhatsApp, by way of the Final Submissions, confirmed 187 its
agreement with the above approach. In the circumstances, I conclude that this factor is neither
mitigating nor aggravating.

ARTICLE 83(2)(J): ADHERENCE TO APPROVED CODES OF CONDUCT PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 40 OR APPROVED CERTIFICATION
MECHANISMS PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 42
9.57

The EDPB (in the Article 65 Decision) has not addressed this aspect of matters. The Commission
proposes to consider this factor as neither mitigating nor aggravating in circumstances where
nothing arises for assessment under this heading. WhatsApp, by way of the Final Submissions,
confirmed 188 its agreement with the above approach. In the circumstances, I conclude that this
factor is neither mitigating nor aggravating.

ARTICLE 83(2)(K): ANY OTHER AGGRAVATING OR MITIGATING FACTOR APPLICABLE TO THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE CASE,
SUCH AS FINANCIAL BENEFITS GAINED, OR LOSSES AVOIDED, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, FROM THE INFRINGEMENT

Final Submissions, paragraph 10.40.
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.41.
188
Final Submissions, paragraph 10.42.
186
187

66

9.58

The EDPB (in the Article 65 Decision) has not addressed this aspect of matters. The Commission
notes, however, the EDPB’s view, as set out in the EDPB’s binding decision 1/2021 (paragraphs
409 to 412, inclusive), that the turnover of the undertaking concerned ought to be taken into
account not just for the calculation of the applicable fining “cap” but also for the purpose of
assessing the quantum of the administrative fine itself. This position is further reflected in the
Fining Guidelines 04/2022 (see, for example, paragraph 49). The Commission’s assessment of the
undertaking concerned and the applicable turnover figure is detailed below. While this is not a
matter that can properly be classified as either mitigating or aggravating, by reference to the
circumstances of the case, the Commission proposed to take the significant turnover of the
undertaking concerned into account when determining the quantum of the proposed fine, as set
out below.

WhatsApp’s Final Submissions in response to the assessment of the Article 6(1) infringement for the
purpose of Article 83(2) GDPR, as introduced to this Decision following the adoption of the Article 65
Decision
9.59

By way of the Final Submissions, WhatsApp has submitted that “the relevant “undertaking” for
determining the fining cap is WhatsApp Ireland alone. Furthermore, the [Commission]’s
consideration of turnover in the calculations of the fining range is incompatible with Article 83(2)
GDPR and constitutes a clear error of law.” 189 I note that WhatsApp has made further submissions
on this aspect of matters, which are addressed further below, as part of the assessment of the
applicable fining “cap”.

9.60

As already noted above, the requirement to have regard to the turnover of the undertaking
concerned in calculating the amount of the fine was previously determined by the EDPB in Binding
Decision 1/2021. Furthermore, the meaning of “undertaking”, as it appears in Article 83 and
Recital 150 GDPR, is also the subject of previous EDPB determinations (including Binding Decision
1/2021). In the circumstances, it is not open to the Commission to disregard these requirements.
Accordingly, and while this is not a matter that can properly be classified as either mitigating or
aggravating by reference to the circumstances of the case, the Commission has taken the
significant turnover of the undertaking concerned into account when determining the quantum
of the proposed fine, as set out below.

Summary
9.61

By reference to the above, the Commission concludes that:
(i) The infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR (and taking into account the infringement of the Article
5(1)(a) fairness principle) has been assessed as falling at the upper end of the scale, in terms
of seriousness, for the purpose of Article 83(2)(a).

189

Final Submissions, paragraph 10.44.

67

(ii) The categories of personal data affected by the Article 6(1) GDPR infringement ought to be
taken into account as a mitigating factor of the lightest possible weight.
(iii) Otherwise, the assessments of the Article 83(2)(b), 83(2)(c), 83(2)(d), 83(2)(e), 83(2)(f),
83(2)(h), 83(2)(i), 83(2)(j) and 83(2)(k) criteria are to be treated as neither mitigating nor
aggravating for the purpose of the Article 6(1) GDPR infringement.
Outcome
9.62

On the basis of the above, I proposed to impose an administrative fine of an amount falling within
the range of €5 million and €9 million, in respect of the infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR (and
taking into account the infringement of the Article 5(1)(a) fairness principle).

9.63

The Commission expressed the view that an administrative fine of this nature would satisfy the
requirement in Article 83(1) GDPR for any administrative fine imposed to be effective,
proportionate and dissuasive in each individual case. In this regard, I have taken account of:
(a) The purpose of the fine, which is to sanction the infringement of Article 6(1) (and taking
into account the infringement of the Article 5(1)(a) fairness principle) that was found to
have occurred (by the EDPB in the Article 65 Decision);
(b) The requirement for any fine to be effective. In this regard, the Commission notes that
the fine proposed above reflects the circumstances of the case, including both the specific
elements of the infringement as well as those elements that relate to the controller which
committed the infringement, namely its financial position (as required by paragraph 414
of the EDPB’s binding decision 1/2021);
(c) The requirement for a genuinely deterrent effect, in terms of discouraging both
WhatsApp and others from committing the same infringement in the future;
(d) The requirement for any fine to be proportionate and to not exceed what is necessary to
achieve the stated objective (as recorded at a., above). The Commission considers that
the fine proposed is proportionate to the circumstances of the case, taking into account
the gravity of the infringements and all of the elements that may lead to an increase
(aggravating factors) or decrease (mitigating factors) of the initial assessment as well as
the significant turnover of the undertaking concerned. The fine also takes account of the
fact that the fine will be imposed in addition to an order requiring WhatsApp to take
action to bring its processing into compliance;
(e) I have also taken particular account, in this regard, of the facts that:
68

i.

The EDPB’s finding of infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR was largely based on the
lack of transparency, as regards the information that was presented to the data
subject concerning the processing that would be carried out further to the Terms
of Service.

ii. The EDPB’s finding of infringement of Article 5(1)(a) fairness principle was
similarly largely based on the lack of transparency, as regards the information
that was presented to the data subject concerning the processing that would be
carried out further to the Terms of Service.
iii. As already noted, the Transparency Decision imposed administrative fines
totalling €225 million on WhatsApp arising from its failure to comply with its
transparency obligations in the context of its Privacy Policy and related material.
I have taken this previous sanction into account when proposing the fining range
set out above so as to avoid the risk of punishing WhatsApp twice in respect of
the same conduct. This factor necessitated a very significant reduction in the fine
that might otherwise have been imposed, notwithstanding the significant
turnover of the undertaking concerned and the outcome of the Article 83(2)(a)
assessment, as recorded above.
WhatsApp’s Final Submissions in response to the assessment of the Article 6(1) infringement for the
purpose of Article 83(1), as introduced to this Decision following the adoption of the Article 65 Decision
9.64

WhatsApp, by way of its Final Submissions, disagreed with the above.

9.65

Addressing, firstly, WhatsApp’s general (and repeated) submission that “the reasoning in the
Decision Extracts in respect of the calculation of the fine is inadequate, such that it is impossible
to understand how the proposed fining range has been calculated or how the different factors
discussed by the [Commission] have had an impact on the proposed fine.” 190, I do not agree that
this is the case. As is evident from the extensive analysis set out above, the Commission has
clearly identified the factors that were considered relevant for the purpose of each of the
individual Article 83(2) assessments. Furthermore, the manner in which the relevant factors have
been taken into account, as a mitigating or aggravating factor, as well as the weight that has been
attributed to each one has been clearly addressed. I have also identified the reasons why I
consider the fining range proposed to satisfy the requirements of Article 83(1) GDPR.

9.66

The approach taken is in line with the Commission’s obligation to provide reasons for its decisions.
While the Commission is required to explain how it arrived at the level of a proposed fine, it is not

190

Final Submissions, paragraphs 10.2 and 11.2.

69

required to apply such specificity so as to allow a controller or processor to make a precise
mathematical calculation of the expected fine. 191
9.67

Turning to WhatsApp’s substantive submissions on the Article 83(1) assessment, I firstly note that
it has submitted that the proposed fining range “is inconsistent with the requirements of Article
83(1) GDPR” 192 and that the fining range proposed “… is excessive and higher than the minimum
amount necessary to be “effective” and “dissuasive”, and therefore is not “proportionate”…”.

9.68

In relation to the requirement for administrative fines to be effective, WhatsApp has restated 193
its view that the taking into account of “financial position” is an “error of law”. I note that I have
already set out the reasons why I am required to take account of such matters as part of my
assessment of the Article 83(2)(k) criterion, above. WhatsApp has further submitted 194 that,
taking into account that it will be subject to a “potentially very onerous compliance order
requiring significant expenditure of resources”, the imposition of an administrative fine is simply
unnecessary to render this Decision effective. It has further submitted 195 that the imposition of a
fine is not necessary or justified in circumstances where it has also made updates to its Terms of
Service and Privacy Policy since the commencement of the Inquiry.

9.69

In response to the above, I note that the Commission is subject to a binding decision of the EDPB
that requires the Commission to impose an administrative fine to address the finding of Article
6(1) (and taking into account the infringement of the Article 5(1)(a) principle of fairness), both of
which were established by the Article 65 Decision. In the circumstances, it is simply not open to
the Commission to disregard the clear instruction, in the Article 65 Decision, that requires the
Commission to impose an administrative fine.

9.70

In relation to the requirement for administrative fines to be dissuasive, WhatsApp has
submitted 196 that it relied on Article 6(1)(b) in good faith and, accordingly, there is no conduct
that should be deterred. I note that this position is not consistent with views expressed by the
EDPB in the Article 65 Decision and, accordingly, I am unable to take this submission into account.
WhatsApp has further submitted that the order to bring processing into compliance will
“inevitably have a significant dissuasive effect on WhatsApp and, to the extent relevant, any other
controller undertaking similar processing” 197. As noted above, the purpose of an administrative
fine is to sanction wrongdoing that it found to have occurred. This stands in contrast with

191
See, by analogy, HSBC Holdings plc and Others v Commission, T-105/17, ECLI:EU:T:2019:675, paragraphs 336 –
354.
192
Final Submissions, paragraph 11.1.
193
Final Submissions, paragraph 11.3
194
Final Submissions, paragraph 11.4
195
Final Submissions, paragraph 11.5
196
Final Submissions, paragraph 11.7
197
Final Submissions, paragraph 11.8

70

measures such as an order to bring processing into compliance, which operates to bring about
the required remedial action. In the circumstances, I do not consider the order that will be made
pursuant to this Decision to be relevant, in the context of the requirement for the fining range
proposed above to be dissuasive.
9.71

In relation to the requirement for administrative fines to be proportionate, WhatsApp has again
restated 198 its position, as regards its good faith reliance on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, and the
entitlement of the Commission to take account of turnover when assessing the proposed fining
range for the purpose of Article 83(1) GDPR. I have already addressed such matters further to the
assessment of Article 83(2)(k) GDPR. While WhatsApp additionally submitted that no material
gains were made in relation to the alleged infringement and that account should be taken of the
fact that the WhatsApp service is free to users, I am not minded to take account of such matters
in circumstances where there is no way for me to know, with certainty, what impact the
infringement had on WhatsApp’s financial position. Furthermore, while I acknowledge that
WhatsApp’s service is free to users, it is unclear how this is relevant to the Article 83(1)
assessment.

9.72

In the circumstances, and having considered WhatsApp’s submissions on the matter, I remain of
the view that the fining range proposed above satisfies the requirements of Article 83(1) GDPR.

9.73

Having completed my assessment of whether or not to impose a fine (and of the amount of any
such fine), I must now consider the remaining provisions of Article 83 GDPR, with a view to
ascertaining if there are any factors that might require the adjustment of the proposed fines.

ASSESSMENT OF THE UNDERTAKING CONCERNED AND THE APPLICABLE FINING “CAP”
9.74

Having identified the range of the administrative fine that I consider to be effective, proportionate
and dissuasive to the circumstances of the case, I must now identify the maximum limit of the fine
that may be imposed so as to ensure that the Commission does not exceed this maximum when
adopting its Decision. As already noted, the infringement of Article 6(1) GDPR is subject to the
higher fining “cap” set out in Article 83(5) GDPR, as follows:
“Infringements of the following provisions shall, in accordance with paragraph 2, be
subject to administrative fines up to 20 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an undertaking, up
to 4% of the total worldwide annual turnover of the preceding financial year, whichever is
higher:
(a)
the basic principles for processing, including conditions for consent,
pursuant to Articles 5. 6, 7 and 9;

198

Final Submissions, paragraphs 11.11 and 11.12

71

…”
9.75

In order to determine the applicable fining “cap”, it is firstly necessary to consider whether or not
the fine is to be imposed on “an undertaking”. Recital 150 clarifies, in this regard, that:
“Where administrative fines are imposed on an undertaking, an undertaking should be
understood to be an undertaking in accordance with Articles 101 and 102 TFEU for those
purposes.”

9.76

Accordingly, when considering a respondent’s status as an undertaking, the GDPR requires me to
do so by reference to the concept of ‘undertaking’, as that term is understood in a competition
law context. In this regard, that the Court of Justice of the EU (“the CJEU”) has established that:
“an undertaking encompasses every entity engaged in an economic activity regardless of
the legal status of the entity and the way in which it is financed 199”

9.77

The CJEU has held that a number of different enterprises could together comprise a single
economic unit where one of those enterprises is able to exercise decisive influence over the
behaviour of the others on the market. Such decisive influence may arise, for example, in the
context of a parent company and its wholly owned subsidiary. Where an entity (such as a
subsidiary) does not independently decide upon its own conduct on the market, but carries out,
in all material respects, the instructions given to it by another entity (such as a parent), this means
that both entities constitute a single economic unit and a single undertaking for the purpose of
Articles 101 and 102 TFEU. The ability, on the part of the parent company, to exercise decisive
influence over the subsidiary’s behaviour on the market, means that the conduct of the subsidiary
may be imputed to the parent company, without having to establish the personal involvement of
the parent company in the infringement 200.

9.78

In the context of Article 83 GDPR, the concept of ‘undertaking’ means that, where there is another
entity that is in a position to exercise decisive influence over the controller/processor’s behaviour
on the market, then they will together constitute a single economic entity and a single
undertaking. Accordingly, the relevant fining “cap” will be calculated by reference to the turnover
of the undertaking as a whole, rather than the turnover of the controller or processor concerned.

9.79

In order to ascertain whether a subsidiary determines its conduct on the market independently,
account must be taken of all the relevant factors relating to the economic, organisational and
legal links which tie the subsidiary to the parent company, which may vary from case to case 201.

Höfner and Elser v Macrotron GmbH (Case C-41/90, judgment delivered 23 April 1991), EU:C:1991:161 §21
Akzo Nobel and Others v Commission, (Case C-97/08 P, judgment delivered 10 September 2009) EU:C:2009:536,
§ 58 - 61
201
Ori Martin and SLM v Commission (C-490/15 P, judgment delivered 14 September 2016) ECLI:EU:C:2016:678 § 60
199
200

72

9.80

The CJEU has, however, established that, where a parent company has a 100% shareholding in a
subsidiary, it follows that:
a. the parent company is able to exercise decisive influence over the conduct of the
subsidiary; and
b. a rebuttable presumption arises that the parent company does in fact exercise a
decisive influence over the conduct of its subsidiary.

9.81

The CJEU has also established that, 202 in a case where a company holds all or almost all of the
capital of an intermediate company which, in turn, holds all or almost all of the capital of a
subsidiary of its group, there is also a rebuttable presumption that that company exercises a
decisive influence over the conduct of the intermediate company and indirectly, via that
company, also over the conduct of that subsidiary 203.

9.82

The General Court has further held that, in effect, the presumption may be applied in any case
where the parent company is in a similar situation to that of a sole owner as regards its power to
exercise a decisive influence over the conduct of its subsidiary 204. This reflects the position that:
“… the presumption of actual exercise of decisive influence is based, in essence, on the
premise that the fact that a parent company holds all or virtually all the share capital of
its subsidiary enables the Commission to conclude, without supporting evidence, that that
parent company has the power to exercise a decisive influence over the subsidiary without
there being any need to take into account the interests of other shareholders when
adopting strategic decisions or in the day-to-day business of that subsidiary, which does
not determine its own market conduct independently, but in accordance with the wishes
of that parent company … 205”

9.83

Where the presumption of decisive influence has been raised, it may be rebutted by the
production of sufficient evidence that shows, by reference to the economic, organisational and
legal links between the two entities, that the subsidiary acts independently on the market.

Akzo Nobel and Others v Commission, (C-97/08 P, judgment delivered 10 September 2009).
Judgment of 8 May 2013, Eni v Commission, Case C-508/11 P, EU:C:2013:289, paragraph 48
204
Judgments of 7 June 2011, Total and Elf Aquitaine v Commission, T-206/06, not published, EU:T:2011:250,
paragraph 56; of 12 December 2014, Repsol Lubricantes y Especialidades and Others v Commission, T-562/08, not
published, EU:T:2014:1078, paragraph 42; and of 15 July 2015, Socitrel and Companhia Previdente v Commission,
T-413/10 and T-414/10, EU:T:2015:500, paragraph 204
205
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott in Akzo Nobel and Others v Commission, C-97/08 P, EU:C:2009:262, point 73
(as cited in judgment of 12 July 2018, The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. v European Commission, Case T-419/14,
ECLI:EU:T:2018:445, paragraph 51)
202
203

73

9.84

It is important to note that “decisive influence”, in this context, refers to the ability of a parent
company to influence, directly or indirectly, the way in which its subsidiary organises its affairs, in
a corporate sense, for example, in relation to its day-to-day business or the adoption of strategic
decisions. While this could include, for example, the ability to direct a subsidiary to comply with
all applicable laws, including the GDPR, in a general sense, it does not require the parent to have
the ability to determine the purposes and means of the processing of personal data by its
subsidiary.

Application of the above to the within inquiry
9.85

Having reviewed the Directors’ Report and Financial Statements filed on behalf of WhatsApp with
the Irish Companies Registration Office (in respect of the financial year ended 31 December 2021)
I note that this document confirms, on page 3 thereof, that:
“WhatsApp is a simple, reliable and secure messaging and calling application that is used
by people and businesses around the world to communicate in a private way. WhatsApp
Ireland Limited is wholly owned by WhatsApp LLC, a company incorporated in the United
States of America. Its ultimate parent is Meta Platforms, Inc., (formerly Facebook, Inc.) a
company incorporated in the United States of America.
The principal activity of the Company is acting as the data controller for European users
of the WhatsApp service and the provision of services to WhatsApp LLC …”

9.86

It is further confirmed, on page 5 thereof, that:
“Going concern
…The company’s ultimate parent undertaking, Meta Platforms, Inc., has indicated that it
will provide such financial support to the Company, in the event that funds are not
otherwise available, to enable it to meet its obligations as they fall due for a period of
twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements…”

9.87

It is further stated, on page 14 thereof, that:
“The ultimate holding company and ultimate controlling party is Meta Platforms, Inc.,
(formerly Facebook, Inc.) a company incorporated in Wilmington, Delaware, United States
of America. The ultimate holding company and controlling party of the smallest and
largest group of which the Company is a member, and for which consolidated financial
statements are drawn up, is Meta Platforms, Inc. The immediate parent company of the
Company is WhatsApp LLC, a company established under the laws of the United States of
America”
74

9.88

On the basis of the above, it appears that:
a. WhatsApp is the wholly owned subsidiary of WhatsApp LLC.;
b. WhatsApp LLC is ultimately owned and controlled by Meta Platforms Inc.; and
c. As regards any intermediary companies in the corporate chain, between WhatsApp IE and
Meta Platforms Inc., it is assumed, by reference to the statements recorded above, that
the “ultimate holding company and controlling party of the smallest and largest group of
which [WhatsApp] is a member … is Meta Platforms, Inc.”

9.89

It follows, therefore, that:
a. The corporate structure of the entities concerned and, in particular, the fact that Meta
Platforms Inc. owns and controls WhatsApp LLC means that Meta Platforms Inc. is able to
exercise decisive influence over WhatsApp’s behaviour on the market; and
b. A rebuttable presumption arises that Meta Platforms Inc. does in fact exercise a decisive
influence over the conduct of WhatsApp on the market.

9.90

If this presumption is not rebutted, it means that Meta Platforms Inc. and WhatsApp constitute a
single economic unit and therefore form a single undertaking within the meaning of Article 101
TFEU. Consequently, the relevant fining “cap” for the purpose of Article 83(4) and 83(5) GDPR,
would fall to be determined by reference to the turnover of the Meta Platforms Inc. group of
companies.

9.91

The Commission put the above to WhatsApp, by way of letter dated 15 December 2022, and
invited it to express its views, in relation to whether it agreed with the assessment set out above
and, in particular, the rebuttable presumption set out at paragraph 9.89 above. In response,
WhatsApp confirmed that: 206
a. WhatsApp is the wholly owned subsidiary of WhatsApp LLC.; and
b. WhatsApp LLC is ultimately owned and controlled by Meta Platforms Inc.

9.92

206

While WhatsApp furnished a range of submissions that disputed the above approach (as
summarised below), it did not detail, by reference to the economic, organisational and legal links
between the entities concerned why it regarded itself as being able to act independently on the
market.

Letter dated 23 December 2022 from WhatsApp’s legal advisors to the Commission

75

9.93

WhatsApp submitted that it is an error of law to apply the concepts of “turnover” and
“undertaking”, from competition law, to the GDPR. 207 WhatsApp emphasised that the only explicit
reference to competition law in the GDPR is found in Recital 150, which is in contrast with the
position in competition law, where the explicit provision is made for the concept of an
undertaking in Articles 101 and 102 TFEU. 208 WhatsApp submitted that the concept of an
undertaking pierces the corporate veil in competition law, so as to impute responsibility to a
parent company for infringements of its subsidiaries. WhatsApp placed particular reliance on the
importance of the phrase “on the market”, and contrasts this with the position of data controllers
under the GDPR, in circumstances where Article 4(7) GDPR explicitly states that controllers
themselves determine the purposes and means of data processing, and in circumstances where
the GDPR attributes liability to controllers. 209

9.94

WhatsApp sought to draw particular attention to the fact that the substantive legal rules within
the GDPR are addressed to controllers rather than the single economic unit, and that
administrative orders are primarily directed at controllers, per Article 58 GDPR. Taking this into
account, WhatsApp has submitted that “… in determining whether separate legal entities ought
to be treated as forming part of the same undertaking under the GDPR, the question is the extent
to which the parent company can exert a dominant influence over the processing of personal data
by the subsidiary.” 210

9.95

I respectfully disagree with this suggestion, which appears to reduce the phrase “behaviour on
the market”, which is the focus of the relevant assessment, in terms of parent’s ability to exercise
influence, to a very limited position which concerns only the parent’s ability to influence its
subsidiary’s data processing operations. Firstly, the approach proposed by WhatsApp (involving
an assessment of where the decision-making power lies, in relation to the processing of personal
data) is effectively a replication of the assessment that must be undertaken at the outset of the
inquiry process, the outcome of which determines (i) the party/parties to which the inquiry should
be addressed; and (ii) (in cross border processing cases) the supervisory authority with jurisdiction
to conduct the inquiry. Given the consequences that flow from this type of assessment, it would
not be appropriate for this assessment to be conducted at the decision-making stage of an inquiry.

9.96

Secondly, the suggested approach could not be applied equally in each and every case. Where,
for example, the presumption of decisive influence has been raised in the context of a crossborder processing case where one of the entities under assessment is outside of the EU, an
assessment of that entity’s ability to exercise decisive influence over the respondent’s data
processing activities would likely exceed scope of Article 3 GDPR. Such a scenario risks

Ibid, page 2.
Ibid, page 3.
209
Ibid, pages 3-4.
210
Ibid, page 4.
207
208

76

undermining the Commission’s ability to comply with its obligation, pursuant to Article 83(1)
GDPR, to ensure that the imposition of fines, in each individual case, is “effective, proportionate
and dissuasive”.
9.97

Thirdly, the approach taken by the Commission does not exceed the territorial scope established
by Article 3 GDPR. The personal involvement of any other entity in the alleged infringement is
not a relevant consideration for the purpose of the required assessment. Accordingly, the
assessment of whether or not any other entity is in a position to exercise decisive influence over
the respondent’s behaviour on the market does not require the Commission to consider matters
that might exceed the territorial scope of the GDPR.

9.98

Finally, the application of the approach that has been suggested by WhatsApp would be contrary
to the clear intention of the legislature, as indicated by Recital 150 and the relevant travaux
préparatoires (which are an accepted aid to interpretation, particularly in relation to EU secondary
legislation such as the GDPR). The suggested approach would represent a marked departure from
the manner in which the required assessment is usually carried out. Accordingly, if this had been
the intention of the legislature, it is unclear why this was not indicated in Article 83 GDPR or Recital
150 (either expressly, or by the incorporation of reference to the scoping provisions of Article 3
or to the concept of “main establishment”, as defined by Article 4(16), such that it is clear that
the assessment of “behaviour on the market” should be limited to the processing of personal data
in the EU).

9.99

Furthermore, the phrase “behaviour on the market” ought to be attributed the meaning normally
ascribed to it in EU competition law. In summary, “behaviour on the market” describes how an
entity behaves and conducts its affairs in the context of the economic activity in which it engages.
Such behaviour will include matters such as the policies and procedures it implements, the
marketing strategy it pursues, the terms and conditions attaching to any products or services it
delivers, its pricing structures, etc. I therefore can see no basis in law, in WhatsApp’s submissions
or otherwise, to deviate from this well-established principle as set out both in the GDPR, other
provisions of EU law and the jurisprudence of the CJEU.

9.100 WhatsApp has also emphasised the fact that Articles 83(1)-(3) GDPR make no reference to the
turnover of the undertaking. Specifically, it argues that:
“While reference is made in Article 83 to the turnover of the undertaking, this is limited to
the provisions which govern the calculation of the fining caps; Articles 83(4)-(6). For the
reasons set out above, [WhatsApp] does not accept that the language of Articles 83(4)-(6)
imports the concept of the “undertaking”, as provided for in Articles 101 and 102 TFEU.
However, even if it did (quod non), this concept is clearly not imported into the provisions
which govern the calculation of the administrative fines to be imposed, namely, Articles
83(1)-(3) GDPR, which make no reference whatsoever to the turnover of the undertaking.
77

It is submitted, therefore, that were the [Commission] to have regard to the turnover of
[Meta Platforms Inc.] in calculating the administrative fine, this would constitute an error
of law.” 211
9.101 I note that I have already addressed this particular submission above, as part of the assessment
of Article 83(2)(k) GDPR. As noted, the Commission is required by the EDPB’s Binding Decision
1/2021 to take account of the turnover of the undertaking concerned when calculating the
quantum of the administrative fine to be imposed. I note that this position is further reflected in
the EDPB’s Fining Guidelines 04/2022 (see, for example, paragraph 49 thereof).
9.102 For the avoidance of doubt, I note that there is a clear difference of opinion, between WhatsApp
and the Commission, as regards the assessment of the relevant turnover, for the purpose of
Article 83 GDPR and the function of that turnover, within Article 83 itself. I note that the
Commission comprehensively addressed the position with WhatsApp previously, in the context
of the WhatsApp Transparency Decision, and the Commission continues to rely on its position, as
outlined therein (and as repeated above). Furthermore, the Commission notes that its approach
is consistent with the position of the EDPB, as reflected in Binding Decision 1/2021 and Fining
Guidelines 4/2022.
9.103 Applying the above to Article 83(5) GDPR, I firstly note that, in circumstances where the fine is
being imposed on an “undertaking”, a fine of up to 4% of the total worldwide annual turnover of
the preceding financial year may be imposed. I note, in this regard, that Meta Platforms, Inc.
reported the generation of revenue in the amount of $117.929 billion for the year ending 31
December 2021. 212 The Commission understands this figure to correspond to the consolidated
turnover of the group of companies headed by Meta Platforms, Inc. That being the case, the
administrative fine imposed herein does not exceed the applicable fining “cap” prescribed by
Article 83(5) GDPR.
SUMMARY OF THE ENVISAGED ACTION
9.104 I therefore decide to exercise the following corrective powers:
9.105 An order is hereby made, pursuant to Article 58(2)(d) GDPR, requiring WhatsApp to bring
processing into compliance (“the Order”) within a period of six months commencing on the day
following the date of service, in WhatsApp, of this Decision. The Order requires WhatsApp to take
the necessary action to bring its processing of personal data for the purposes of service
improvement and security features (excluding processing for the purpose of “IT Security” as
defined by paragraph 90 of the Article 65 Decision) (“the Processing”) into compliance with Article
Ibid, page 5.
https://investor.fb.com/investor-news/press-release-details/2022/Meta-Reports-Fourth-Quarter-and-Full-Year2021-Results/default.aspx.
211
212

78

6(1) GDPR in accordance with the conclusion reached by the EDPB, as recorded at paragraphs 121
and 122 of the Article 65 Decision. More specifically, in this regard, WhatsApp is required to take
the necessary action to address the EDPB’s finding that WhatsApp is not entitled to carry out the
Processing on the basis of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR, taking into account the analysis and views
expressed by the EDPB in Section 4.4.2 of the Article 65 Decision. Such action may include, but is
not limited to, the identification of an appropriate alternative legal basis, in Article 6(1) GDPR, for
the Processing together with the implementation of any necessary measures, as might be
required to satisfy the conditionality associated with that/those alternative legal basis/bases.
9.106 An administrative fine is hereby imposed, pursuant to Articles 58(2)(i) and 83 GDPR, addressed to
WhatsApp, in the amount of €5.5 million.
9.107 WhatsApp has the right of an effective remedy as against this Decision, the details of which have
been provided separately.

This Decision is addressed to:
WhatsApp Ireland Limited
4 Grand Canal Square
Grand Canal Harbour
Dublin 2
Dated the 12th day of January 2023
Decision-Maker for the Commission:

[sent electronically, without signature]
_______________________________________
Helen Dixon
Commissioner for Data Protection

79

SCHEDULE 1
1

CHRONOLOGY, PROCEDURAL AND SCOPE MATTERS PERTAINING TO INQUIRY

1.1

The complaint (“the Complaint”) was lodged with the Hamburg Data Protection Authority: Der
Hamburgische Beauftragte für Datenschutz und Informationsfreiheit (“the Hamburg DPA”) on 25
May 2018 (the date on which the GDPR became applicable) by the Complainant’s representative
(noyb – European center for digital rights) and was subsequently passed to the German Federal
Data Protection Authority, the relevant national authority: Bundesbeauftragter für den
Datenschutz und die Informationsfreiheit (“the German Federal DPA”). The legal framework for
the Complaint as lodged with the Commission is set out below. In brief, the Complaint concerns
the lawfulness of WhatsApp Ireland Limited’s (“WhatsApp”) processing of personal data,
specifically data processing on foot of the Complainant’s acceptance of its Terms of Service (and
purportedly her acceptance of its Privacy Policy), and the transparency of information provided
by WhatsApp to the Complainant about that processing.

1.2

The Commission began the inquiry (“the Inquiry”) by designating an investigator (“the
Investigator”), who produced a draft of an inquiry report (“the Draft Inquiry Report”) and,
following submissions from the WhatsApp and the Complainant’s representative, a final inquiry
report (“the Final Inquiry Report”). In considering this Inquiry, I have relied on the facts as set out
in the Final Inquiry Report. I have also had regard to the views set out by the Investigator in the
Final Inquiry Report, as well as to the entirety of the file, in preparing this Schedule 1.

1.3

The preliminary draft decision (“the Preliminary Draft”) set out my provisional findings, as the
decision-maker in this matter, in relation to (i) whether or not an infringement of the GDPR has
occurred/is occurring, and (ii) the envisaged action, if any, to be taken by the Commission in respect
of same. The Preliminary Draft Decision and a draft of this Schedule 1 were provided to WhatsApp
and the Complainant’s representative for the purpose of allowing them to make submissions on my
provisional findings.

1.4

The submissions of WhatsApp were received and taken into account by the Commission. In relation
to the Complainant’s representative, no submissions were received and the Commission therefore
wrote to the Complainant’s representative’s legal advisors by letter dated 25 February 2022. In that
letter, the Commission indicated that if no reply were received, the Commission would operate on
the basis that the Complainant’s representative did not wish to make submissions. In the
alternative, the Commission proposed that the Complainant’s representative was free, if it wished,
to rely on submissions it made in a factually and legally similar complaint into the Facebook platform
(with internal Commission inquiry reference IN 18-5-5). This was in circumstances where the
Complainant’s representative had elected to do this in relation to a factually and legally similar
complaint into the Instagram platform (bearing internal Commission inquiry reference IN 18-5-7).
No further correspondence was received, and the Commission has therefore proceeded on the
80

basis that the Complainant’s representative does not wish to make submissions in relation to the
Preliminary Draft.
1.5

Having taken careful account of those submissions, I finalised a draft decision (“the Draft Decision”)
and associated updated draft of this Schedule 1. As the cross-border processing under examination
in this Inquiry was such that all other EU/EEA supervisory authorities (the “SAs”, each one being an
“SA”) were engaged as supervisory authorities concerned (“the CSAs”) for the purpose of the
cooperation process outlined in Article 60 GDPR. Following the circulation of the Draft Decision and
Schedule to the CSAs for the purpose of enabling them to express their views, in accordance with
Article 60(3) GDPR, objections were raised by the SAs of France, Germany (Federal, and
representing a co-ordinated response by the German SAs), Finland, Italy, the Netherlands and
Norway. A number of comments were also exchanged by various CSAs.

1.6

Having considered the matters raised, the Commission, by way of a composite response
memorandum dated 1 July 2022, set out its responses together with the compromise positions that
it proposed to take in response to the various objections and comments. Ultimately, it was not
possible to reach consensus with the CSAs on the subject-matter of the objections and, accordingly,
the Commission determined that it would not follow them. That being the case, the Commission
referred the objections to the European Data Protection Board (the “EDPB” or the “Board”) for
determination pursuant to the dispute resolution mechanism provided for in Article 65(1)(a) GDPR.
In advance of doing so, the Commission invited WhatsApp to exercise its right to be heard in respect
of the objections (and comments) that the Commission proposed to refer to the EDPB, along with
the Commission’s composite response memorandum dated 1 July 2022, and the communications
received from the CSAs in reply to the Composite Response.

1.7

WhatsApp exercised its right to be heard by way of its submissions dated 17 August 2022 (“the
Article 65 Submissions”). The EDPB adopted its decision pursuant to Article 65(2) GDPR (“the
Article 65 Decision”) 213 on 5 December 2022 and notified it to the Commission and CSAs on 15
December 2022. As set out in Article 65(1) GDPR, the Article 65 Decision is binding on the
Commission. Accordingly, and as required by Article 65(6) GDPR, the Commission has now amended
its Draft Decision, by way of this final decision (“the Decision”), in order to take account of the
EDPB’s determination of the various objections from the CSAs which it determined to be “relevant
and reasoned” for the purpose of Article 4(24) GDPR. Following the amendment of the Draft
Decision to take account of the EDPB’s Article 65 Decision, WhatsApp was invited to exercise its
right to be heard in relation to those aspects of the Draft Decision, in relation to which the
Commission was required to make a final determination or, otherwise, to exercise its discretion.
WhatsApp furnished its submissions on these matters under cover of letter dated 23 December
2022 (“the Final Submissions”).

Binding Decision 5/2022 on the dispute submitted by the Irish SA on WhatsApp Ireland Limited, adopted 5
December 2022.
213

81

1.8

For the avoidance of doubt, this Schedule is an integral and operative part of the Decision for the
purposes of Article 60 and 65 GDPR. The previous division of material into two documents was
entirely a structural choice, so as to enable a more exclusive focus on the substantive Complaint in
the main document, while dealing with matters of a more procedural nature herein. It has been
incorporated into the Decision itself as part of the finalisation process, prior to adoption.

LEGAL BASIS FOR THE INQUIRY
1.9

The Inquiry in this case was conducted by the Investigator under Section 110 of the Data Protection
Act 2018 Act (the “2018 Act”).

1.10 The decision-making process for the Inquiry which applies to this case is provided for under Section
113(2)(a) of the 2018 Act. Additionally, Section 113(3)(a) of the Act requires that the Commission
must consider the information obtained during the Inquiry; decide whether an infringement is
occurring or has occurred; and if so, decide on the envisaged action (if any) to be taken in relation
to the data controller. This function is performed by me in my role as the decision-maker. In so
doing, I have carried out an independent assessment of all of the materials provided to me by the
Investigator.
1.11 As stated above, the Inquiry was commenced pursuant to Section 110 of the 2018 Act. By way of
background in this regard, under Part 6 of the 2018 Act, the Commission has the power to
commence an inquiry on several bases, including on foot of a complaint, or of its own volition.
1.12 In his consideration of the material, the Investigator was satisfied that WhatsApp constitutes a data
controller and that the processing referred to in the Complaint constitutes cross-border processing,
such that the Commission is the lead supervisory authority as set out in the GDPR. I my decision in
this regard below.
REFERRAL BY GERMAN FEDERAL DPA
1.13 The Complaint was referred to the Commission by the German Federal DPA on the basis that (i) the
Complaint concerns cross-border processing and (ii) WhatsApp, as the data controller, has its main
establishment in Ireland. In this regard, the German Federal DPA forwarded the Complaint to the
Commission on 31 May 2018. The Commission assessed the Complaint as lead supervisory
authority, commenced the Inquiry under Section 110 of the 2018 Act on 20 August 2018. WhatsApp
and the Complainant’s representative were also notified of the commencement of the Inquiry on
20 August 2018.
STATUS OF THE COMPLAINANT’S REPRESENTATIVE

82

1.14 The Complainant’s representative is acting as a representative of a named individual in accordance
with Article 80 GDPR, which states that:
“The data subject shall have the right to mandate a not-for-profit body, organisation or
association which has been properly constituted in accordance with the law of a Member
State, has statutory objectives which are in the public interest, and is active in the field of
the protection of data subjects’ rights and freedoms with regard to the protection of their
personal data to lodge the complaint on his or her behalf…”
1.15 For the purposes of assessing compliance with Article 80 GDPR, it is necessary to assess whether
the Complainant’s representative was a properly constituted not-for-profit body with objectives in
the public interest and that was actively engaged in “the field of the protection of data subject
rights”. In this regard, the Investigator consulted the Complainant’s representative’s website, and
its articles of association, which explain that it is a “verein” (association) under Austrian law. Having
reviewed paragraphs 101-106 of the Final Inquiry Report and Appendix 4 of the Final Inquiry Report
(the Complainant’s representative’s articles of association), I am satisfied that the Complainant’s
representative meets the definition set out in Article 80 GDPR. The Complainant’s representative
is a not-for-profit body that appears on its face (although the Commission has no specific
competence to rule in this regard) to be validly constituted in accordance with Austrian law, with
objectives which are in the public interest. From having reviewed this information, I am also
satisfied that the Complainant’s representative is active in the field of the protection of data subject
rights. On this basis, I am satisfied that these all meet the definition in Article 80 GDPR.
1.16 Moreover, it is necessary to determine the validity of the data subject’s mandate in order to decide
whether the Complainant’s representative may represent them. I am satisfied, having reviewed
paragraphs 107-112 of the Final Inquiry Report and Appendix 6 of the Final Inquiry Report (the data
subject’s “mandate”) that the mandate provided to the Complainant’s representative by the data
subject was lawful, and that therefore the Complainant’s representative has the right to represent
the data subject in this matter. The mandate includes the name, address and signature of the data
subject being represented by the Complainant’s representative. I note, as was noted by the
Investigator, that the mandate specifically refers to “forced consent to the update privacy policy
that I clicked on to in May 2018”. On an objective reading of this mandate, the Complainant’s
representative was given authority to represent the data subject in relation to alleged
infringements of the GDPR concerning agreement to the Terms of Service and Data Policy.
1.17 Subsequent documents have also been provided by the Complainant’s representative in order to
argue that it is not limited in any way in its representation of the Complainant. The law is clear that
such documentation cannot alter, post hoc, the nature of the data subject mandate that was
provided to the Complainant’s representative in accordance with Article 80 GDPR to launch a
complaint on its behalf. The nature of the Complaint was specified and detailed in the mandate.
However, as the scope of the Complaint as I find below does not, in my view, conflict with the
83

mandate, the question of whether any additional documentation can subsequently broaden the
scope of the Complainant’s representative’s mandate in relation to an extant inquiry procedure is
moot.
1.18 WhatsApp expressed no particular view on the Complainant’s representative’s status under Article
80 GDPR, or on the data subject’s mandate, save in respect of its position on the scope of the
Inquiry. WhatsApp has argued that the scope of the Inquiry as determined by the Commission was
too broad both because it goes beyond, in WhatsApp’s view, the text of the Complaint, and because
it goes beyond the scope of the data subject’s mandate. 214 I consider this argument below when I
consider the general question of the scope of the Inquiry.
PROCEDURAL CONDUCT OF INQUIRY
1.19 As set out above, the Inquiry was commenced on 20 August 2018 for the purposes of examining
and assessing the circumstances surrounding the Complaint as referred to the Commission by the
German Federal DPA, with a view to ultimately facilitating a decision under Section 113(2)(a) of the
Act.
1.20 The Commission commenced the Inquiry as it was “… of the opinion that one or more provisions of
the [2018] Act and/or the GDPR may have been contravened in relation to the personal data of the
data subject who is represented by the Complainant pursuant to Art. 80(1) GDPR…” 215 The
Commission formed this view on the basis of the contents of the Complaint and the arguments it
sets out. WhatsApp and the Complainant’s representative were informed of the commencement
of the Inquiry by way of a letter dated 20 August 2018. The letter to WhatsApp set out that the
scope of the Inquiry would encompass the contents of the Complaint. The letter also set out a
number of queries for WhatsApp.
1.21 The Investigator subsequently wrote to WhatsApp on 4 February 2019 setting out the alleged
infringements in the Complaint and seeking WhatsApp’s submissions on specific matters.
WhatsApp responded to these queries, and the preliminary queries contained in the letter to
WhatsApp dated 20 August 2018, by way of correspondence and attached submissions on 11 March
2019.
1.22 Meanwhile, a number of procedural issues were raised by the Complainant’s representative in
correspondence dated 3 December 2018. These issues consisted of an allegation of delay on the
part of the Commission, and an allegation of bias on the part of the Commission, and a rejection of
the interpretation of the Complaint’s scope proposed by the Investigator. The Investigator
responded to the Complainant’s representative on 16 January 2019 refuting the allegations in
strong terms. A further phone call took place between the Investigator and Mr. Maximilian
214
215

WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 4.3.
Letter from the Commission to WhatApp, 20 August 2018.

84

Schrems, honorary chairman of noyb – European center for digital rights, i.e. the Complainant’s
representative, on 25 January 2019, in this regard.
1.23 The Complainant’s representative sent a letter to the Investigator dated 29 February 2019, raising
a number of additional procedural concerns including a query as to the nature of the procedure
being utilised by the Commission, as well as concerns and queries surrounding the exchange of
documents. The Investigator responded to these queries by way of letter dated 28 March 2019.
1.24 Mr. Maximilian Schrems raised a number of these concerns with the Investigator in a phone
conversation on 1 April 2019. Further to this, the Complainant’s representative wrote to the
Investigator on 19 April 2019 to set out the concerns in writing. These concerns related to dealing
directly with the Commission in circumstances where the Complaint was lodged with the German
Federal DPA, as well as concerns surrounding the applicability of Irish procedural law as opposed to
German procedural law, and conflicts between Irish procedural law and German procedural law.
These concerns were also raised by the Complainant’s representative in its submissions on the Draft
Inquiry Report and were addressed in the Final Inquiry Report. I address these concerns and
procedural issues below.
1.25 Further correspondence was sent to the Investigator by both the Complainant’s representative and
the Complainant’s representative’s legal representative on 24 February 2020, expressing concerns
regarding, inter alia, the impact of a draft inquiry report in a separate but similar inquiry opened by
the Commission on foot of a separate but similar complaint, where the Complainant’s
representative was also representing that complainant. The letter made further allegations relating
to delay and a failure to provide the Complainant’s representative with sufficient documentation,
and threatened to take legal proceedings against the Commission unless these grievances were
addressed.
1.26 The Investigator wrote to the Complainant’s representative’s solicitors on 23 March 2020, setting
out that it was not appropriate that further submissions would be made in the herein Inquiry at
that point, and that any concerns the Complainant’s representative had could be set out
comprehensively when it had an opportunity to make submissions on the Draft Inquiry Report,
which was still being prepared. The Investigator also responded to and refuted, in that
correspondence, allegations relating to the Commission’s procedures, including that they were,
inter alia, “unwieldly”. The Investigator set out that all necessary documentation had been provided
to the Complainant’s representative.
1.27 Having completed the Draft Inquiry Report, the Investigator furnished WhatsApp and the
Complainant’s representative with a copy of it on 20 May 2020. WhatsApp’s submissions on the
Draft Inquiry Report were received by the Investigator on 22 June 2020.

85

1.28 The Complainant’s representative’s submissions on the Draft Inquiry Report, which were delayed
due to issues of translation, are dated 4 September 2020.
1.29 In terms of its contents, the Final Inquiry Report sets out the factual background, and the scope and
legal basis, for the Inquiry. It also provides an outline of the facts as established during the course
of the Inquiry, an outline of the dispute about the scope of the Inquiry and the Investigator’s view
on same, and an outline of the procedural disputes that arose during the Inquiry and the
Investigator’s view on same. The Final Inquiry Report further sets out the Investigator’s views as to
whether, in respect of these matters, WhatsApp complied with its obligations under GDPR and the
2018 Act.
2

Procedural Issues Decided

2.1 As set out above, this is a schedule to, and integral part of, the Decision, (at this point, I note that I am
the sole member of the Commission) in accordance with Section 113 of the 2018 Act. Section 113 of
the 2018 Act provides as follows:
(2) Where section 109 (4)(a) applies, the Commission shall—
(a) in accordance with subsection (3), make a draft decision in respect of the complaint
(or, as the case may be, part of the complaint) and, where applicable, as to the
envisaged action to be taken in relation to the controller or processor concerned, and
(b) in accordance with Article 60 and, where appropriate, Article 65, adopt its decision in
respect of the complaint or, as the case may be, part of the complaint.
(3) In making a draft decision under subsection (2)(a), the Commission shall, where applicable, have
regard to—
(a) the information obtained by the Commission in its examination of the complaint,
including, where an inquiry has been conducted in respect of the complaint, the
information obtained in the inquiry, and
(b) any draft for a decision that is submitted to the Commission by a supervisory authority
in accordance with Article 56(4).
(4) Where the Commission adopts a decision under subsection (2)(b) to the effect that an
infringement by the controller or processor concerned has occurred or is occurring, it shall, in
addition, make a decision—
(a) where an inquiry has been conducted in respect of the complaint(i) as to whether a corrective power should be exercised in respect of the
controller or processor concerned, and
86

(ii) where it decides to so exercise a corrective power, the corrective power that is
to be exercised,
2.2

In accordance with Section 113, it is for me, as the sole member of the Commission, to consider the
information obtained in the course of the Inquiry; to decide whether an infringement is occurring
or has occurred; and if so, to decide on the envisaged action in respect of the controller (if any). In
so doing, I will carry out an independent assessment of all of the materials provided to me by the
Investigator.

2.3

Given that the Commission is the lead supervisory authority under Article 56(1) GDPR for the
purposes of the data processing operations at issue, I am obliged under Section 113(2) and Article
60(3) GDPR to complete a draft decision to be provided to any supervisory authorities concerned,
as defined in Article 4(22) GDPR.

2.4 As set out above at paragraph 1.1, this concerns my Decision, having submitted the Draft Decision
under Article 60(3) GDPR to the CSAs, and having taken account of the Article 65 Decision, as explained
in the text of the Decision itself. The purpose of the Draft Schedule and the Preliminary Draft Decision
were to allow the parties to make any submissions in respect of my provisional findings set out. This
is the finalised version of the Decision (incorporating the previous schedule), as also explained in
further detail in the Decision.
DECISION-MAKING PROCESS – MATERIALS CONSIDERED
2.5

The Final Inquiry Report was transmitted to me on 18 January 2021, together with the Investigator’s
file, containing copies of all correspondence exchanged between the Investigator, WhatsApp and
the Complainant’s representative; and copies of any submissions made by WhatsApp and the
Complainant’s representative, including the submissions made by them in respect of the
Investigator’s Draft Inquiry Report. A letter then issued to both WhatsApp and the Complainant’s
representative on 6 April 2020, to confirm the commencement of the decision-making process. For
the avoidance of doubt, I have had regard to all material contained in the file when preparing this
Decision.

2.6

As decision-maker, I must be satisfied that WhatsApp is a controller within the meaning of the
GDPR, that the Commission has competence in respect of this Inquiry, and that fair procedures have
been followed throughout the Inquiry. As I have set out above, a number of procedural complaints
were made by the Complainant’s representative throughout the Inquiry process. These issues are
addressed in this Schedule 1.

WHATSAPP AS CONTROLLER
2.7 In commencing the Inquiry, the Investigator was satisfied that WhatsApp is the controller, within the
meaning of Article 4(7) of the GDPR, in respect of the personal data that was the subject of the
87

Complaint. In this regard, WhatsApp confirmed that it was the controller for data processing in the
European Union in a letter to the Investigator dated 11 March 2019, where it stated that it was
responsible for:
“• Making the Service available to EU users;
• Setting policies governing how EU user data is processed;
• Controlling access to and use of EU user data;
• Handling and resolving data-related inquiries and complaints from EU users of the Service
whether directly or indirectly via regulators;
• Responding to requests for EU user data from law enforcement;
• Ensuring the Service’s compliance with EU data protection laws and ongoing evaluation of the
Service; and
• Guiding the development of products involving EU user data in accordance with EU data
protection laws.”
2.8 The concept of controllership is defined in Article 4(7) GDPR which states that a controller is
“… the natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which, alone or
jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data;
where the purposes and means of such processing are determined by Union or Member
State law, the controller or the specific criteria for its nomination may be provided for by
Union or Member State law”.
2.9 As concerns whether WhatsApp is a data controller for EU users, it should be noted that there has
been a course of historical and ongoing engagement, by WhatsApp, with the Commission in part in
relation to the handling of complaints, amongst other things. Having regard to these ongoing
interactions, the Commission is satisfied that WhatsApp acts as the controller, determining the means
and purposes of processing in respect of the personal data of individuals, in relation to the delivery of
its services across the EU.
2.10 In relation to the work of the Commission, and my work as Commissioner, it is clear to me based
on direct experience that decisions in relation to the purposes and means of data processing for
European data subjects are made by WhatsApp Ireland Limited. By way of recent example, a largescale own-volition inquiry was conducted by the Commission into the transparency of WhatsApp’s

88

Privacy Policy, and a number of orders to bring the Privacy Policy into compliance were made. 216 It is
clear to the Commission from this engagement that WhatsApp Ireland Limited exercises the role of
data controller in this regard. Moreover, in the context of the dispute resolution procedure pursuant
to Article 65 GDPR that was triggered in that same inquiry, the concerned supervisory authorities and
European Data Protection Board (“the EDPB”) did not contest the Commission’s position, in this
regard.
COMPETENCE OF THE COMMISSION
2.11 Pursuant to Article 56(1) GDPR, “… the supervisory authority of the main establishment or of the
single establishment of the controller or processor shall be competent to act as lead supervisory
authority for the cross-border processing carried out by that controller or processor”. It follows that
the Commission is only competent to act as the lead supervisory authority if (i) WhatsApp’s main or
single establishment in the Union is located is Ireland, and (ii) there is cross-border processing as
defined in the GDPR.
2.12 As regards the requirement that, in order to come within the competence of the Commission as
the lead supervisory authority, WhatsApp must demonstrate that it has either its single or main
establishment in Ireland, the Commission confirms that WhatsApp, as controller for its cross-border
processing activities, has its single establishment located in Ireland, with permanent office premises
located at 4 Grand Canal Square, Grand Canal Harbour, Dublin 2. The Commission is satisfied that
WhatsApp’s employees are, in ordinary course, based at these office premises.
2.13 Since 25 May 2018, a total of 88 complaints made against WhatsApp have been transmitted to
the Commission by the supervisory authorities of Germany (the Federal authority acting on behalf of
various regional authorities), the Netherlands, Austria, Spain, the United Kingdom, France, Finland
and Poland, in circumstances where those authorities were acting as concerned supervisory
authorities (insofar as they have received complaints from complainants). Those complaints have
been transmitted to the Commission on the basis that the Commission is the lead supervisory
authority for WhatsApp. The Commission notes that no supervisory authority to date has objected to
such designation of the Commission as the lead supervisory authority in respect of the cross-border
processing carried on by WhatsApp.
2.14 WhatsApp confirmed to the Commission, in the course of the Inquiry, that it regarded the above
position to be the case. 217 In this regard, I further note that the Investigator, and the Commission
generally, was satisfied, in commencing the Inquiry, that WhatsApp Ireland Limited was the main
establishment in the European Union within the meaning of Article 56(1) GDPR. Moreover, I have
already found, for the reasons set out above, that decisions on the purposes and means of the
https://edpb.europa.eu/system/files/2021-09/dpc_final_decision_redacted_for_issue_to_edpb_01-0921_en.pdf.
217
Final Inquiry Report, paragraph 99.
216

89

processing of personal data are taken by WhatsApp Ireland Limited. For these reasons and the reasons
already set out above, I am satisfied that WhatsApp Ireland Limited is WhatsApp’s place of central
administration in the Union. I am also satisfied, on the information available to me, that decisions
which relate to the means and purposes of data processing are made by WhatsApp Ireland.
2.15 Turning to cross-border processing, cross-border processing is defined in Article 4(23) GDPR as
either:
“(a) processing of personal data which takes place in the context of the activities of
establishments in more than one Member State of a controller or processor in the Union
where the controller or processor is established in more than one Member State;
or
(b) processing of personal data which takes place in the context of the activities of a single
establishment of a controller or processor in the Union but which substantially affects or
is likely to substantially affect data subjects in more than one Member State.”
2.16 I note that the Investigator was satisfied that there was cross-border processing carried out by
WhatsApp (within the meaning of Article 4(23) GDPR), in relation to the personal data that was the
subject of the Complaint. 218 Given the scale of WhatsApp’s operations across the European Union
outlined above, I am satisfied that there is cross-border processing as defined in the GDPR for the
purposes of this Complaint. This position of the Commission has been acknowledged by WhatsApp. 219
2.17 I am satisfied based on the above evidence secured through publicly available sources,
information voluntarily provided by WhatsApp, and information acquired by the Commission in the
course of conducting investigations, that WhatsApp Ireland is the data controller for EU users and is
the organisation’s place of central administration in the Union. I am also satisfied, for the reasons set
out above, that this Complaint concerns cross-border processing. I therefore agree with the
Investigator that WhatsApp Ireland meets the definition of “main establishment” in Article 4(16)
GDPR, and that therefore the Commission is competent to act as lead supervisory authority in
accordance with Article 56 GDPR.
CONSUMER PROTECTION AND COMPETITION AUTHORITIES
2.18 The Investigator informed the Complainant’s representative by letter dated 16 January 2019 that
the Commission does not have competence to investigate matters pertaining to competition or

218
219

Ibid.
WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 3.1.

90

consumer law. 220 Therefore, the Investigator provided the relevant competition221 and consumer 222
law authorities with a partially redacted copy of the Complaint for consideration of matters which
may fall within their competence.
2.19 In submissions on the Draft Inquiry Report, the Complainant’s representative expressed
“amazement” that the Commission had referred matters relating to competition and consumer law
to the relevant regulatory authorities.223 The Complainant’s representative submitted that the
referral to other regulatory authorities was not appropriate as the Commission had competence to
consider the entirety of the Complaint. 224
2.20 In this regard, I emphasise that the Commission’s competence is limited to matters pertaining to
data protection. Accordingly, the Commission cannot consider issues which relate to competition or
consumer law. Therefore, I am satisfied that the Investigator was correct in referring the appropriate
matters to the relevant authorities.
THE RIGHT TO BE HEARD AND ACCESS TO THE FILE
2.21 In the course of the Inquiry, the Complainant’s representative also submitted that “… both parties
have to receive all files, documents and submissions before a DPA to be able to defend their legal
positions”.225 In response to the Complainant’s representative’s request for access to the complete
file, the Investigator correctly informed the Complainant’s representative, by way of letter dated 16
January 2019, that “… there is no statutory right of access to the complete inquiry file under Irish law”
and that the parties to the Complaint would be provided with the material information and
documents as appropriate to ensure the right to be heard. 226 I agree with the Investigator on this
issue and do not propose to consider it further.
ISSUES OF GERMAN LAW
2.22 The next procedural issue is an overarching point that is relevant to each of the other individual
points raised by the Complainant’s representative, and so I will consider this point before considering
the other points in turn. This Complaint was lodged with the Hamburg SA, and was then transferred
by the German Federal SA to the Commission as lead supervisory authority in accordance with Article
Letter from the Commission to the Complainant’s representative dated 16 January 2019, at p. 5.
The Irish Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC), Belgian Competition Authority, and the
European Commission Directorate General for Competition (DG COMP).
222
Irish Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC), Consumer Protection Division of the Belgian
Federal Public Service Economy, S.M.E.s, Self-employed and Energy, and the European Commission Directorate
General for Justice and Consumers (DG JUST).
223
Complainant’s representative’s submissions on Draft Inquiry Report, paragraph 2.7.
224
Ibid.
225
Letter from the Complainant’s representative to the Commission dated 3 December 2018, at p. 3.
226
Letter from the Commission to the Complainant’s representative dated 16 January 2019, at p. 5.
220
221

91

56 GDPR. The Commission then launched a statutory inquiry in accordance with Irish law. The
Complainant’s representative, however, argues that because the Complaint itself was lodged with the
Hamburg SA in Germany, the Complaint must be handled in accordance with the procedural laws of
both Germany and Ireland.
2.23 The Complainant’s representative made these arguments in its submissions to the Investigator, 227
and specifically argues that the applicable procedural law is the Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz (“the
VwVfG”), Germany’s code of administrative procedure. It is the Complainant’s representative’s view
that the VwVfG permits the alteration of the scope of a procedure in particular circumstances while
the Inquiry is ongoing, and seeks to rely on this in order to dispute the Investigator’s view of the scope
of the Complaint, and to alter that scope and/or to ensure that “the substantive request is now
adapted accordingly”. 228 My decision on scope of the Complaint is considered in detail below, and at
this point I am solely considering the applicability or otherwise of the VwVfG to the actions of the
Commission in general.
2.24 As the decision-maker at the Commission, I take no view on the Complainant’s representative’s
characterisation of the VwVfG or of any other questions of German law. The Commission was
established in Ireland by the 2018 Act, thereby meeting Ireland’s obligations to establish such an
authority under Article 51 (and Chapter VI generally) GDPR, given it is directly applicable in Ireland
pursuant to Article 288 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. Section 12 of the
2018 Act provides a number of functions for the Commission “… in addition to the functions assigned
to the Commission by virtue of its being the supervisory authority for the purposes of the Data
Protection Regulation”.
2.25 Chapter VI of the GDPR set out in detail the responsibilities and powers of supervisory authorities.
While it is not necessary to set out Chapter VI here, it is noteworthy that Article 51(1) GDPR states
that “… [e]ach Member States shall provide for one or more independent public authorities to be
responsible for monitoring the application of this Regulation” [my emphasis]. Moreover, Section 12 of
the 2018 Act does not confer any powers on the Commission in respect to the laws of any other
jurisdiction.
2.26 The powers of the Commission must be limited to those conferred on it by law. The Commission
is tasked with encouraging, monitoring and enforcing compliance with the GDPR. In that context it is,
like all other public authorities in the State, bound by the administrative law of Ireland and EU law,
including EU law on fair procedures and the European Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms.
Further, as I stated above, Article 56(1) GDPR sets out that “… the supervisory authority of the main
establishment or of the single establishment of the controller or processor shall be competent to act
as lead supervisory authority”.

227
228

Complainant’s representative’s submissions on Draft Inquiry Report, inter alia, paragraph 2.1.
Ibid.

92

2.27
The Commission therefore derives its legal authority to handle the Complaint from the GDPR and
the 2018 Act, and is, in that regard, bound by the legal order set out above. The Commission is not
bound, nor must it have regard to, the administrative law of Germany, or of any other jurisdiction.
Moreover, it seems to me that not only does the administrative law of Germany not bind the
Commission, but that any attempt by the Commission to apply such law would be plainly ultra vires
the powers conferred on the Commission by law. WhatsApp has made no particular submission on
this issue in response to the Preliminary Draft.

ALLEGATION OF BIAS
2.28 As has been set out above, the Complainant’s representative wrote to the Investigator on 3
December 2018 raising a number of procedural issues, including an allegation of bias on the part of
the Commission, which I will address here. I will subsequently address the Complainant’s
representative’s allegation that the manner in which the Commission dealt with the scope of the
Complaint was contrary to its right to fair procedures, before considering the substantive question of
the scope of the Complaint in the subsequent section.
2.29 In the letter dated 3 December 2018, the Complainant’s representative alleged that there had
been prior “approval” by the Commission of the legal bases used by Facebook Ireland Limited, now
known as Meta Platforms Ireland Limited (“Facebook”), a member of the same family of companies
as WhatsApp, for processing personal data. This was based in part on a statement made in Vienna’s
Landesgericht (Regional Court) that the “… used legal basis for the processing of data under GDPR was
developed under extended regulatory involvement by the [Commission] in multiple personal meetings
between November 2017 and July 2018”.229 In the letter, the Complainant’s representative stated that
“… [t}his does not just raise questions about your claim that you have to “investigate” and “inquire”
[sic.] this matter – when in fact you have already negotiated with the Facebook Group about these
legal and factual questions between 2017 and 2018, but raises issues about an obvious bias of a
decision maker that has previously approved the criticized mechanism.” 230
2.30 In the same letter, the Complainant’s representative referred to the existence of a rule against
bias in both Ireland other jurisdictions, but did not elaborate on its legal views of the nature of the
test in either jurisdiction, and did not present any arguments explaining why, in its view, the
Commission had acted in a manner that contravened any such test. Moreover, the Complainant’s
representative offered no evidence to substantiate the factually inaccurate claim that the Commission
“previously approved” the “mechanism” in question or to substantiate the allegation that the
consultation process gave rise to the apprehension of bias.

229
230

Case 3Cg52/14k at the LGfZRS Wien, paragraph 209.
Letter from Complainant’s representative to Commission, 3 December 2018.

93

2.31 The Investigator responded to this and other allegations in a letter dated 16 January 2019. The
Investigator correctly observed that the allegations of bias were unsubstantiated, and confirmed that
“… [the Commission] does not and never has, endorsed, jointly developed, approved or in any other
way assented or consented to a controller’s or processor’s policies or position in relation to compliance
with its data protection obligations.” It was clarified that the interactions referred to by Complainant’s
representative were for the purpose of “… being updated…and being providing high level feedback”
to both Facebook and to a large number of other private and public sector organisations with which
the Commission interacts as part of its “… consultation and engagement with regulatory
stakeholders.” I agree with the Investigator’s view just set out, for the reasons which I have set out
above. I also note that while the consultation process being objected to related to Facebook, the
Complainant’s representative raised this issue of bias in relation to the herein Inquiry as well.
2.32 I also note and agree with the Investigator’s statement in the same letter that outlined the
Commission’s statutory obligations under the Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003, which were in
force at the time. This also applies, as was pointed out by the Investigator, under Article 57 GDPR. The
Commission implements these obligations to promote awareness of data protection law by
maintaining an active consultation function. The Investigator also clarified that the Commission “…
makes it abundantly clear to any organisation that seeks to consult with it that this is the premise upon
which consultation takes place and that it is entirely a matter for that organisation to ensure that it is
in compliance with data protection law.” This is, in my view, an accurate characterisation of the
position. In a subsequent telephone call with staff of the Commission on 25 January 2019, Mr.
Maximilian Schrems, raised the matter of bias once again. At this point, a Deputy Commissioner at
the Commission reiterated the Commission’s position, in this regard, to Mr. Schrems. 231
2.33 This issue of bias was not raised again until the Complainant’s representative furnished the
Investigator with submissions on the Draft Inquiry Report dated 4 September 2020. For the sake of
completeness, the entirety of the Complainant’s representative’s submission, in this regard, is set out
below:
“In another case against Facebook it became apparent that concerning the procedure
criticised here, i.e. the lawfulness of the processing, Facebook and the [the Commission] have
worked together in ten sessions. This is evident, among other things, on page 2 of the pleading
of 27.9.2018 by Facebook in that procedure (Appendix A).That is why we draw attention to
the problem of partiality.
It seems difficult to imagine that the authority can make use of its power to impose sanctions
if it has worked out in advance the criminal procedure with (the) Facebook (group) to which
WhatsApp belongs. This also results in a potential contradiction with the GDPR, which provides
for "effective, proportionate and dissuasive” fines in Article 83(1).

231

Memorandum of phone call, 25 January 2019.

94

We do not yet know how the Irish authority wants to deal with this problem and we expressly
reserve for ourselves remedies for this.” 232
2.34 As is evident from this quotation, the Complainant’s representative offered no specific evidence
in respect of this unsubstantiated allegation. Moreover, no reference is made to the Commission’s
clarification that no approval or authorisation for the Terms of Service was provided to WhatsApp (or
Facebook) by the Commission. The premise of the Complainant’s representative’s argument, as had
already been pointed out by the Investigator, is incorrect. The reference to “meetings” in Facebook’s
submissions cited by the Complainant’s representative in the above quotation is the only reference
to the Commission’s consultation function in any submissions made by Facebook in the inquiry in
question, and indeed does not relate to WhatsApp, or to this Inquiry. The reference is as follows:
“We have drafted this response against the background of our detailed direct engagement with
the Commission prior to the implementation of the recent update to our terms, spanning 10
meetings, which covered many of the issues responded to herein. Facebook Ireland has not
materially changed its compliance approach since these meetings.”
2.35 I moreover note, in this regard, that while Facebook, Inc. was WhatsApp’s and Facebook’s parent
company at the time, and that they were therefore both part of the “Facebook family of companies”,
WhatsApp is an entirely separate company from Facebook, and was not involved in the said
consultation process referred to by Facebook and the Complainant’s representative.
2.36 It is clear that this is a reference to a consultative process, and at no point does WhatsApp or its
parent, Facebook, assert that the Terms of Service were approved or endorsed by the Commission; it
is merely asserted that these Terms of Service have not changed since a consultation process took
place. A controller would of course not be entitled to rely on remarks made in such meetings. In
addition, it is not clear to me how WhatsApp can be said to be using the above statement to support
its legal position, or indeed any argument, in relation to the Inquiry, particularly in circumstances
where it relates to an entirely different data controller. For the purpose of providing additional
context, I also emphasise that this quotation is taken from a two-page covering letter preceding
submissions to the Commission in the context of a separate inquiry, as opposed to being extracted
from such submissions to the Commission or being part of any submissions made in the herein Inquiry.
2.37 Finally, this matter was raised, indirectly, in the form of an “open letter” published by the
Complainant’s representative and sent to other SAs and to the EDPB. In this letter, public allegations
were made about the Commission’s cooperation with what the Complainant’s representative called
Facebook’s “consent bypass”. 233 To the extent that this letter directly addresses the allegation of bias
at all, it once again proceeds on the false factual premise that that WhatsApp (and Meta/Facebook
Submissions of Complainant’s representative on Draft Inquiry Report, paragraph 2.8.
Open letter of Complainant’s representative, page 3, https://noyb.eu/sites/default/files/202005/Open%20Letter_noyb_GDPR.pdf.
232
233

95

companies generally) “… simply followed the [Commission]’s advice.” It is further alleged that this
renders the Commission’s processes “… structurally biased because it is essentially reviewing its own
legal advice”. It has already been clarified above that, contrary to this assertion, the Commission did
not approve any such mechanism, nor did it provide legal advice to Facebook/WhatsApp, or any other
data controller. It has also been clarified that WhatsApp has in fact not sought to rely on such
consultations in this Inquiry.
2.38 In the open letter, it was alleged that “… [k]eeping these meetings confidential is only adding to
the impression that the [Commission] and Facebook have engaged in a relationship that is
inappropriate for a neutral and independent oversight authority.” 234 Aside from the fact that the
Commission’s consultation function is widely publicised, such an allegation has no basis in law. The
relevant facts have been provided to the Complainant’s representative by the Commission on multiple
occasions, and a reasonable and objective explanation of those facts has been provided to the
Complainant’s representative by the Commission on multiple occasions.
2.39 It is factually not the case that the Commission endorsed or approved of the Terms of Service and
Privacy Policy of WhatsApp that were in place at the time of the Complaint, or indeed of any other
organisation. Moreover, irrespective of any feedback that may or may not have been provided to
Facebook, WhatsApp, or any other organisation, the Commission always emphasises that the
consultation function is entirely distinct from any statutory inquiries, investigations, or decisions of
the Commission. I also emphasise that this decision-making process was also functionally independent
of the procedure conducted by the Investigator that led to the Final Inquiry Report, just as the
statutory inquiries are functionally independent from any and all consultations with the Commission.
The factual premise of the allegation is incorrect, and the test for bias has not been met. WhatsApp
has made no particular submission, in this regard.
TRANSLATION ISSUES
2.40 Having been furnished with the Preliminary Draft, the Complainant’s representative wrote to the
Commission by way of email dated 28 December 2021. It argued in that email that:
“… our complaint was filed with the [German Federal DPA] and the [German Federal DPA]
has so far clearly insisted, that all communication must take place via the [German Federal
DPA] and in German. This is a clear legal requirement under the GDPR and the German
VwVfG, that the [German Federal DPA] and [the Complainant’s representative] are bound
to observe, as previously confirmed by the [Commission]. We are surprised that the latest
communication was (again) not observing these clear procedural requirements.”
2.41 The Commission by way of response dated 30 December 2021 clarified that “… [i]n circumstances
where Irish procedural law is applicable to this inquiry process, the [Commission] will not be providing
234

Ibid.

96

a German language translation of the Preliminary Draft Decision.” The Complainant’s representative
responded by email dated 30 December 2021 alleging, inter alia, that the Commission “… has
repeatedly and strategically withheld documents from us” and that in its view not providing a Germanlanguage copy of the Preliminary Draft would be contrary to law. The Commission responded on 31
December 2021 stating that the Commission’s position had already been outlined, and that “… any of
your queries regarding the [German Federal DPA] position ought to be directed to [German Federal
DPA].”
2.42 The Complainant’s representative wrote to the Commission once again by way of email dated 7
January 2022. It stated that:
“… we would like to inform you that we have received a response from the [German
Federal DPA] today, confirming that the relevant documents will be translated to German.
We will await this translation in accordance with German law and properly file our
response with the [German Federal DPA] in German, to ensure full compliance with the
applicable German procedural laws. We will apply the four week deadline from the time
we received the documents in German, similar to the deadline set by the [Commission]
once the English documents were provided.”
2.43 The Complainant’s representative went on to seek confirmation that the existing deadline for
receipt of submissions was therefore obsolete. The Commission responded by letter dated 17 January
2022, in which a lengthy explanation was provided as to why the Commission considered the
Complainant’s representative’s position to be incorrect as a matter of law, and furthermore
obstructive. The Commission nonetheless agreed to extend the deadline for the provision of
submissions by a further four weeks.
2.44 Separately, the Commission received correspondence from the German Federal DPA, which
clarified its position on the question of German law raised by the Complainant’s representative, in this
regard. The email, dated 25 January 2022, stated that in its view:
“… it is exceptionally not necessary to provide a translated version in advance. We already
provided the translated draft report to [the Complainant’s representative] in August 2020.
We believe the facts haven't changed substantially. We referred to the binding decision in
[July] 2021 from which at least a short statement is available in German…[w]e have
informed [the Complainant’s representative] of this view.”
2.45 On this basis, the Commission wrote to the Complainant’s representative’s legal advisors by letter
dated 27 January 2022 clarifying the position of the German Federal DPA, and stating that the
extended deadline stood. The Complainant’s representative’s legal advisors replied by letter also
dated 27 January 2022, seeking copies of correspondence between the German Federal DPA and the
Commission in this regard. The Commission responded by letter dated 27 January 2022 seeking copies
97

of correspondence the Complainant’s representative’s legal advisors had received from the German
Federal DPA, and stating that if a difference of opinion did exist between the Commission and the
German Federal DPA, the appropriate channel for the resolution of such a difference of opinion was
the cooperation and consistency mechanisms provided for by the GDPR.
2.46 The Complainant’s representative’s legal advisors wrote to the Commission once again by letter
dated 1 February 2022. It was set out in that letter that the Complainant’s representative was
informed directly that
“… the [German Federal DPA] takes the view that under German law a Submission on a
Preliminary Draft Decision is not necessary as Submissions under German law are only
necessary on factual elements. Our client’s understanding, therefore, is that the position of
the [German Federal DPA] is not that a translation is not required, but in fact that Submissions
are not required under German law. However if such Submissions are necessary, it would have
to be translated. This seems to be at odds with the view of the [Commission] that the
Submissions are necessary, but the translation is not.”
2.47 The Complainant’s representative’s legal advisors wrote to the Commission by letter dated 3
February 2022 seeking confirmation that the position as outlined in the letter dated 1 February 2022
was correct. The Commission replied by letter dated 3 February 2022 confirming that while the
Complainant’s representative was invited to make submissions, at no point did the Commission assert
that such submissions were necessary. The Commission also clarified that the German Federal DPA,
as had already been outlined by the Commission, did not view it necessary to translate the Preliminary
Draft into German.
2.48 No further correspondence on the question of translation took place. I am satisfied based on the
position confirmed by the German Federal DPA and the Commission’s own legal position in this
regard, that the question of translation in this Inquiry has been dealt with in accordance with law.
ALLEGATION THAT COMPLETE DOCUMENTS HAVE NOT BEEN FURNISHED TO THE COMPLAINANT’S REPRESENTATIVE
2.49 In the Complainant’s representative’s email dated 28 December 2021, a further argument was
made in relation the furnishing of relevant documents it by the Commission. In the email, the
Complainant’s representative stated:
“In addition, it seems the [Commission] is (again) not providing us with the relevant files,
submissions and other documents in this case. We therefore kindly ask you to provide
these documents by 31.12.2021 via the [German Federal DPA]. We are not in a position
to make submissions on the “Preliminary Draft Decision” without having full access to the
files of the case.”

98

2.50 The Commission’s response dated 30 December 2021 confirmed that “…[the Complainant’s
representative] has received all relevant materials”. The Complainant’s representative sought by
further correspondence dated 30 December 2021, “… a confirmation under oath, that the
[Commission] has not only provided us with what it deems “relevant” documents, but all
communication between WhatsApp Limited or any affiliated entity (including its parent company,
legal representatives and alike) that relates to this complaints procedure.” The Commission clarified
by response dated 31 December 2021 that the Commission “...has provided [the Complainant’s
representative] with all relevant material, but, as previously outlined, this does not extend to
appending every item of minor procedural correspondence exchanged between the parties”.
2.51 Separately, the Complainant’s representative’s legal advisors wrote to the Commission on 5
January 2022, in relation to a separate, own-volition inquiry into WhatsApp that the Commission has
concluded. The decision in that inquiry is currently subject to a judicial review and a statutory appeal
before the Irish courts. Its legal advisors argued that “… while it appears the substance of our client’s
Complaint was considered in the Own Volition Inquiry, we have a serious concern that our client’s right
to fair procedures has been breached, perhaps irreparably.” The Complainant’s representative’s legal
advisors went on to seek sight of the pleadings in the judicial review and statutory appeal on this basis
and in order to enable the Complainant’s representative to decide if it wishes to apply to be joined as
a party to the said proceedings.
2.52 The Commission responded to this correspondence by two letters dated 17 January 2022. In the
first letter, it set out that:
“Your client is in receipt of the submissions made by WhatsApp in relation to the
substantive issues under examination in the WhatsApp Inquiry, being two sets of
submissions filed on 11 March 2019 and a further submission (in respect of the Draft
Inquiry Report), made on 22 June 2020.
It is unclear why your client persists in contending otherwise.
If your client thinks it has seen reference, within the body of the [Preliminary Draft], to
material it believes was submitted to the inquiry by WhatsApp, but which your client has
not yet seen, please advise. On notification of such reference(s), we will deal with the
matter forthwith.”
2.53 In the second letter of the same date, and specifically in relation to the question of sight of
pleadings in the unrelated appeal and judicial review, the Commission explained that:
“The Commission’s findings in Inquiry IN-18-12-2 likewise relate to a broad range of issues,
including, inter alia, the specific issue referenced in your letter dated 5 January 2022, i.e.

99

whether WhatsApp’s processing of personal data on the basis of Article 6(1)(b) of the
GDPR satisfy the GDPR’s transparency requirements.
The mere fact that there may be an overlap between an issue addressed in Own-Volition
Inquiry IN-18-12-2, and an issue raised by a complainant represented by your client in a
separate inquiry, does not give your client any right to be heard in relation to Own-Volition
Inquiry IN-18-12-2. Third parties, such as your client, do not have any right to be informed
of, or heard in respect of, an own volition inquiry.
In the circumstances, there has been no failure to observe your client’s right to be heard.”
2.54 For the reasons articulated in the above extracts from correspondence from the Commission to
the Complainant’s representative and/or its legal advisors in relation to the provision of relevant
documents in general, and in relation to the provision of pleadings in the proceedings in question, I
am satisfied that all relevant documents have been provided to the Complainant’s representative and
no question of a breach of fair procedures arises. In particular, I note that aside from the reference to
the said pleadings, the Complainant’s representative has not referred to any specific documents
which it believes to exist and of which it would like sight.
2.55 I am therefore satisfied that fair procedures have been followed in this and every regard thus far
throughout the Inquiry.
3. THE SCOPE OF THE COMPLAINT AND INQUIRY
PROCEDURAL ISSUES SURROUNDING THE SCOPE OF THE COMPLAINT
3.1. The Complainant’s representative also alleged that in determining the scope of the Complaint and in
not allowing it to revise the scope of that Complaint, the Commission was acting contrary to the
Complainant’s right to fair procedures, with a specific focus on German procedural law (which has
been dealt with above).
3.2. The Complainant’s representative wrote to the Investigator by letter dated 19 April 2019, and
addressed the issue of the scope of the Complaint further. The Complainant’s representative stated
that “we reserve the right to amend our arguments should one of the controllers seek to depart from
the factual or legal premises our complaints were based on.” It was also emphasised, in that regard,
that “the complaints explicitly states that the complaints are based on our knowledge at the time of
submission”. Contrastingly, WhatsApp argued that the Complaint’s scope should be strictly limited to
processing that was processed on foot of consent. 235
3.3. In the Draft Inquiry Report, the Investigator relied on a statement in the Complaint which read:
235

WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, inter alia, paragraphs 2.6, 4.3, 7.4, 7.9(A), 8.1.

100

“For practical reasons, the scope of this complaint is explicitly limited to any processing
operations that are wholly or partly based on Article 6(1)(a) and/or Article 9(2)(a) of the
GDPR. Our current understanding is, that these are used as bases for all processing
operations described in the controller’s privacy policy…” 236
3.4. Having outlined the scope, the Complaint then states that “… [n]evertheless, nothing in this complaint
shall indicate that other legal bases the controller may rely on are not equally invalid or may not be
equally the subject of subsequent legal actions.” 237 This qualifying remark, while alluding to the fact
that the Complainant may have other views in relation to other legal bases for data processing carried
out by WhatsApp, is evidently not one that describes the character of the Complaint in question.
While such a remark clearly refers to hypothetical positions the Complainant may have or take in the
future, it cannot alter the limiting character of the preceding statement in and of itself. It instead
clarifies that the Complainant’s representative reserves its position in respect of any other legal bases
on which WhatsApp may or may not rely.
3.5. Having taken an objective reading of the Complaint, the Investigator concluded that the issues that
arose were:
•
•
•
•

Issue (a): the acceptance of the Terms of Service and/or Data Policy was an act of consent;
Issue (b): WhatsApp cannot lawfully rely on necessity for the performance of a contract to
process data arising out of the data subject’s acceptance of those same documents;
Issue (c): WhatsApp misrepresented the legal basis for processing this data; and
Issue (d): WhatsApp failed to provide the necessary information regarding its legal basis for
processing this data.

3.6. The Investigator went on to consider the Complainant’s representative’s submissions that the
Complaint constituted an “introductory request”, 238 and that the scope should be expanded to
include, inter alia: “… an all-encompassing assessment of the legal basis for every type of processing
performed by WhatsApp in respect of the data subject”; “… an assessment of which aspects of the
WhatsApp Terms of Service are relevant contractual terms for the purposes of processing under Article
6(1)(b) GDPR. The complainant submits that assessment should involve a direct assessment of German
contract law by the [the Commission].”; … an exhaustive determination of which parts of the Terms of
Service are "binding" on the data subject (as opposed to "declaratory" contractual language, which

Complaint, paragraph 1.6.
Complaint, Paragraph 1.6.
238
Complainant’s representative’s submissions on Draft Inquiry Report, paragraph 2.3.
236
237

101

the complainant submits is not binding on the data subject)”. 239 WhatsApp by contrast argued that
the scope should be confined to the contents of the Complaint. 240
3.7. The Investigator gave consideration to these submissions and ultimately did not revise his view. 241
WhatsApp’s view was that, contrary to both the view of the Investigator and the Complainant’s
representative, the Complaint should be strictly limited to data processing carried out, as a matter of
fact, on the basis of consent. 242 The Investigator found that it was not necessary to engage in a factual
“trawl” of each one of WhatsApp’s processing operations, but instead to carry out a legal and factual
analysis based on the objective content of the Complaint itself. 243 This was not based on an
assessment of the “will” of the Complainant, hypothetical or otherwise, but simply on an assessment
of the content of the Complaint.
3.8. At this point, I will make an assessment as to whether the Complainant’s representative’s specific
allegations of procedural unfairness in how this was addressed by the Commission thus far have merit.
In the “open letter” to which I have already referred, the Complainant’s representative alleged that
“… the Investigator departed from the applications that were made in accordance with [German]
procedural law and decided to investigate only certain elements of our complaint and to reinterpret
our requests.” 244
3.9. It does not seem to me that the above quotation is an accurate characterisation of what has taken
place. I have already (as had the Investigator) set out views on why German procedural law does not
apply to the activities of the Commission. The merits or otherwise of the Investigator’s objective
analysis of the content of the Complaint is addressed later in this section. I do not accept, however,
that there is, in principle, a procedural defect in limiting the scope of a complaint-based inquiry to the
objective contents of the very Complaint that led the Commission to conduct an Inquiry. As well as
conforming to Section 113 of the 2018 Act (set out earlier in this Section of the Schedule), this
approach is perfectly logical.
3.10. The Complainant’s representative’s arguments in relation to any alleged procedural defects in the
manner in which the scope of the Complaint is to be determined, i.e. by the objective content of the
Complaint, are based on German administrative law, and particularly on the VwVfG. Insofar as that
those arguments are based on German law, for reasons already set out, the Commission cannot
consider those arguments, save to the extent that they raise issues of either Irish or EU law.
3.11. Moreover, as I have set out, the decision to conduct a complaint-based Inquiry arising out of the
contents of a Complaint seems to me to be a perfectly logical approach. The alternative would be an
Final Inquiry Report, pages 11-13.
WhatsApp’s submissions on Draft Inquiry Report, paragraph 2.12.
241
Final Inquiry Report, pages 13-22.
242
WhatsApp submissions on Draft Inquiry Report, paragraph 1.3(D).
243
Final Inquiry Report, paragraph 62.
244
Open letter, page 6 https://noyb.eu/sites/default/files/2020-05/Open%20Letter_noyb_GDPR.pdf.
239
240

102

open-ended procedure, where the content of a “complaint” would crystallise at some unspecified
future date. The inherent problem with such an approach is that it would not amount to an inquiry
based on the Complaint which was lodged with the Commission, but would instead be an inquiry
directed by the Complainant (or their representative), with its subject matter and steps dictated on
an evolving and ongoing basis. Furthermore, it is unclear how it could be said that such an approach
constitutes a complaint that concerns personal data relating to the Complainant. This would
presumably only occur once a complainant is satisfied of receipt of all information they might require,
and has been afforded the opportunity to amend the complaint itself based on the submissions of the
other party.
3.12. The unfairness that could arise from such an approach stems from the fact that it would, in effect,
enable a form of post-hoc amendment to an existing complaint over the course of an indefinite period
of time, which could only come to an end at a time and in a manner of a complainant’s choosing. This
would not only amount to a fundamentally one-sided approach, but would also alter the character of
the inquiry to the extent that it could no longer be described as “complaint-based”, but rather
“complainant-led”. Such a request following a complaint, to the effect that the Commission would
consider a series of extremely broad requests to fundamentally alter an inquiry and deviate from the
initial complaint it had begun to investigate, is therefore procedurally problematic. The Complainant’s
representative has pointed to no legal provision that mandates this, aside from assertions made in
relation to German law that have already been addressed herein.
3.13. This also applies to aspects of the Complaint that either reserve the Complainant’s position or
express views on hypothetical investigative and/or corrective powers that, in the Complainant’s
and/or the Complainant’s representative’s view, the Commission should exercise. I see no breach of
fair procedures in considering the Complaint as a whole in order to determine the exact infringements
being alleged. There is no particular procedural right to make generalised requests to the Commission
to either conduct broad-based investigations or exercise particular corrective powers in the context
of a complaint.
3.14. The Complainant’s representative having lodged the Complaint via the Hamburg SA, responded
to the Draft Inquiry Report, which set out clearly the submissions of WhatsApp and the Investigator’s
views on same. The Complainant’s representative has also be afforded the opportunity to make
submissions on a draft of this Decision. No suggestion has been made that the alternative procedure
proposed by the Complainant’s representative is a requirement of Irish law, nor that the procedure
that has been followed in relation to the scope breaches any rules of fair procedures in Irish law.
Moreover, I am unaware of any case law or statutory provisions in Irish law or EU law that suggests
that such an approach is contrary to the Complainant’s right to fair procedures, and the Complainant’s
representative has not referred to any such law in its submissions.
SUBSTANTIVE SCOPE OF THE COMPLAINT
103

3.15. Put in high-level terms, this complaint-based Inquiry concerns the requirement under EU data
protection law for any entity collecting and processing personal data to establish “a lawful basis” for
the processing under Articles 6 GDPR. This particular Complaint was lodged by reference to WhatsApp
and its lawful basis for processing user personal data and “special category” personal data. I have set
out, in summary form, the contents of the Complaint and arguments contained in it at Section 2 of
this document.
3.16.

“Personal data” is defined under Article 4(1) GDPR as:
“… any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person (‘data subject’);
an identifiable natural person is one who can be identified, directly or indirectly, in
particular by reference to an identifier such as a name, an identification number, location
data, an online identifier or to one or more factors specific to the physical, physiological,
genetic, mental, economic, cultural or social identity of that natural person”.

3.17.

Moreover, Article 4(13) GDPR defines the “genetic data” referred to above as:
“… personal data relating to the inherited or acquired genetic characteristics of a natural
person which give unique information about the physiology or the health of that natural
person and which result, in particular, from an analysis of a biological sample from the
natural person in question”.

3.18.

Article 4(14) GDPR defines “biometric data” as:
“… personal data resulting from specific technical processing relating to the physical,
physiological or behavioural characteristics of a natural person, which allow or confirm
the unique identification of that natural person, such as facial images or dactyloscopic
data”.

3.19.

Finally, “data concerning health” is defined by Article 4(15) GDPR as:
“… personal data related to the physical or mental health of a natural person, including
the provision of health care services, which reveal information about his or her health
status”.

3.20. The other special categories or personal data referred to in Article 9 GDPR are not defined in the
GDPR.
3.21. As set out above, Article 6 GDPR sets out the lawful bases for the processing of personal data. The
provisions of Article 6 that arise in this complaint-based Inquiry are the first two lawful basis listed in
the Article, in Articles 6(1)(a) and 6(1)(b) GDPR. Article 6(1) GDPR states:

104

“6. 1 Processing shall be lawful only if and to the extent that at least one of the following
applies:
(a) the data subject has given consent to the processing of his or her personal data for one
or more specific purposes;
(b) processing is necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data subject is
party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a
contract;
(c) processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller
is subject;
(d) processing is necessary in order to protect the vital interests of the data subject or of
another natural person;
(e) processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest
or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller;
(f) processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued by the
controller or by a third party, except where such interests are overridden by the interests
or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject which require protection of
personal data, in particular where the data subject is a child.
Point (f)f the first subparagraph shall not apply to processing carried out by public
authorities in the performance of their tasks.”
3.22.

A number of conditions for consent are enumerated in Article 7 GDPR:
“1. Where processing is based on consent, the controller shall be able to demonstrate that
the data subject has consented to processing of his or her personal data.
2. If the data subject’s consent is given in the context of a written declaration which also
concerns other matters, the request for consent shall be presented in a manner which is
clearly distinguishable from the other matters, in an intelligible and easily accessible form,
using clear and plain language. Any part of such a declaration which constitutes an
infringement of this Regulation shall not be binding.
3. The data subject shall have the right to withdraw his or her consent at any time. The
withdrawal of consent shall not affect the lawfulness of processing based on consent
before its withdrawal. Prior to giving consent, the data subject shall be informed thereof.
It shall be as easy to withdraw as to give consent.
4. When assessing whether consent is freely given, utmost account shall be taken of
whether, inter alia, the performance of a contract, including the provision of a service, is
105

conditional on consent to the processing of personal data that is not necessary for the
performance of that contract.”
3.23. Article 13(c) GDPR requires data controllers to provide information to data subjects on “the
purposes of the processing for which the personal data are intended as well as the legal basis for the
processing”.
3.24. Article 12(1) GDPR requires that “[t]he controller shall take appropriate measures to provide any
information referred to in Articles 13 and 14…to the data subject in a concise, transparent, intelligible
and easily accessible form, using clear and plain language…”.
3.25. Unusual circumstances arise in relation to this Complaint because of its very starting-point,
namely, the assertion that accepting WhatsApp’s Terms of Service (and, allegedly, Privacy Policy)
purported to bring all personal data processing under the lawful basis of consent for the purposes of
Article 6(1)(a) GDPR. This starting point was rejected in WhatsApp’s submissions. While the
Investigator did not agree with the entirety of WhatsApp’s submissions by any means, he also rejected
this premise. For the reasons set out below, I also rejected it in the Draft Decision. This rejection of
the foundational premise of the Complaint has inevitably rendered the overall subject-matter of the
Complaint effectively less cohesive.
3.26. The Complaint also refers to processing of special category data covered by Article 9 GDPR. The
Complainant’s representative’s submissions on the Draft Inquiry Report make further arguments, in
this regard, particularly in relation to WhatsApp’s alleged ability to infer religious views, sexual
orientation, political views and health status. No evidence is presented for this speculative assertion
based on who the Complainant interacts with. 245
3.27. My view, as expressed in the Draft Decision, was that, for the reasons set out above and the
additional reasons set out below where I had made conclusions on the scope of the Complaint in the
Draft Decision, the Complaint even taken at its height quite clearly only concerns data processing
arising out of the act of acceptance. The Complainant’s representative’s central arguments on “forced
consent” are predicated on the assertion that the acceptance is forcing a consent to personal data
processing for the purposes of the GDPR.
3.28. On this basis, I did not accept, in the Draft Decision and the schedule to the Draft Decision, that
the processing of sensitive categories of personal data on the basis of Article 9 GDPR consent fell
within the scope of this Inquiry. In the Draft Decision and the schedule to the Draft Decision, I noted
that there was no evidence that WhatsApp processes special category data at all. I further noted, in
the Draft Decision and the schedule to the Draft Decision, in relation to the Complainant’s

245

Complaint, paragraph 1.3.; Complainant’s representative’s submissions on Final Inquiry Report, paragraph 5.2.1.

106

representative’s speculative assertion relating to WhatsApp’s ability to infer such data, that messages
between users are end-to-end encrypted. WhatsApp agrees with this position. 246
3.29. WhatsApp takes a narrower view on the scope of the Complaint as determined by the Investigator
and as determined by the Commission in the Preliminary Draft. In particular, WhatsApp is of the view
that the scope of the Complaint relates solely to the allegation of “forced” consent, and that the only
issue that falls to be addressed is the allegation that the Complainant was forced to consent to the
Terms of Service and Privacy Policy (consent here having the meaning it has in Article 6(1)(a) GDPR). 247
3.30. In making this argument, WhatsApp relies on the EDPB’s Guidelines 09/2020 on relevant and
reasoned objections under Regulation 2016/679 (“the RRO Guidelines”). The RRO Guidelines state
that in:
“… procedures based on a complaint or an infringement reported by a [concerned
supervisory authority], the scope of the procedure (i.e. those aspects of data processing
which are potentially the subject of a violation) should be defined by the content of the
complaint or of the report shared by the [concerned supervisory authority]: in other
words, it should be defined by the aspects addressed by the complaint or report.” 248
3.31. While I noted, in the Draft Decision, that the RRO Guidelines self-evidently concern relevant and
reasoned objections made during the Article 60 Process and not the conduct of cross-border inquiries
at Member State level prior to the Article 60 Process, as is the case here, guidelines of the EDPB are
nonetheless significant but non-binding documents as regards the work of the Commission. In the
Draft Decision, I was satisfied that applying the principle articulated paragraph above, the Complaint
still raises issues relating to the obligation to rely on consent and therefore, by implication,
WhatsApp’s inability to rely on another legal basis. In circumstances where WhatsApp is seeking to
rely on necessity for the performance of a contract, that legal basis is the one that stands to be
considered at the level of principle.
3.32. WhatsApp emphasises that the Complainant’s representative’s arguments in relation to its
entitlement to rely on 6(1)(b) GDPR were made not in the Complaint itself, but in submissions. The
reality is that the Complaint was made on an apparently erroneous assumption (that seems to be now
accepted by all parties), i.e. that WhatsApp was relying on consent for some of the processing in
question. The Complainant’s representative is nonetheless persisting in the position it states it has
always held, i.e. (1) that WhatsApp is obliged to rely on consent because no other lawful basis is
applicable, and (2) that the conditions for consent have not been met, therefore the processing is
unlawful. I expressed the view, in the Draft Decision and schedule to the Draft Decision, that in
circumstances where WhatsApp is relying on a lawful basis other than consent, the Complainant’s
WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 7.9(A).
WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 1.3(A).
248
RRO Guidelines paragraph 27, as cited in WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 4.3.
246
247

107

representative position that it is not entitled to do so and must rely on consent (for which the
Complainant’s representative says it has failed to meet the requisite conditions) falls clearly within
the scope of this Complaint.
3.33. On the question of scope, WhatsApp also disputes the inclusion of matters of transparency. 249 In
my view, it has been established in the analysis of the Investigator, the analysis in the Preliminary
Draft, and herein, as well as in the Complaint itself, that matters of transparency clearly arise. The
Complaint specifically asserting that it is difficult to determine the relationship between particular
lawful bases relied on by WhatsApp and individual categories of data, as set out above. Moreover, the
Complaint clearly raises issues about how the “engagement flow” and act of acceptance were
presented to the Complainant. These aspects of the Complaint, for these reasons and reasons already
set out, clearly relate to the transparency provisions of the GDPR.
3.34. In the Draft Decision, I found that the Complaint is therefore one about whether the Terms of
Service (which is the contract with the user) are a deliberately veiled and inadequate means of forcing
consent under GDPR, or whether they are, as WhatsApp contends, a contract with the user for which
certain data processing is necessary in order to perform that contract.
3.35. Having reviewed and considered all of the material submitted by the Complainant’s
representative, I concluded, in the Draft Decision, that the core of the issues raised by the
Complainant were as follows:
a. Accepting the Terms of Service offered by WhatsApp in April 2018 specifically constituted
an act of consent to personal data processing under the GDPR. The precise extent of the
processing complained of is unclear in the Complaint. A particular focus is, however,
placed on both processing in order to deliver behavioural advertising, and on special
category data. The Complainant takes issue with any unlawful processing based on this
agreement, whatever that agreement’s legal character might be.
b. The Complainant argues that 6(1)(a) GDPR, i.e. consent, is the mandatory, default lawful
basis for personal data processing where there is a contract or agreement primarily
concerned with personal data processing, or where the “declaration of intent” of the
parties primarily concerns data processing.
c. Consent under the GDPR is simply an indication of agreement by the data subject
according to the Complainant. The necessary attributes of freely given, specific, informed
and unambiguous are merely “conditions for its validity”, but not features of objective
“consent”.

249

WhatsApp submissions on Preliminary Draft, paragraph 2.6 and 8.1.

108

d. As an alternative to point (a), WhatsApp is not entitled to rely on the “necessary for the
performance of a contract” legal basis under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR other than for very
limited processing. It therefore cannot rely on this as an alternative legal basis to consent
for the acceptance of the Terms of Service as a whole. In this regard, the Complainant
argues that the “purpose” of the contract (here, to deliver a social media service) must
be considered.
e. On the basis of all of the above, the Complainant contends that clicking accept was an
attempt by WhatsApp to seek consent under the GDPR - just not valid consent. The
Complainant describes this as “forced consent”, in that the only choice a user had in April
2018 was to stop using the service, and “hidden consent”, in that some of the description
of the WhatsApp service in the Terms of Service implicitly relies on processing of personal
data.
f.

The Complainant contends that WhatsApp leads data subjects to believe that it relies on
consent as lawful basis for personal data processing and/or is not transparent about its
lawful bases for processing personal data.

3.36. It is important to note, at this juncture that, as set out in paragraph 2.19 of this Decision, the
EDPB, in the Article 65 Decision, took a different view on the scoping of the Complaint.
3.37. WhatsApp’s position is that the Terms of Service forms a contract with its users for the use of its
free service. The Commission observes that this is delivered in the form of a “Click Wrap” agreement
that the user signs up to when clicking “Accept” on the Terms of Service and it looks similar to an
industry standard format for such agreements. Its intention was, WhatsApp says, to rely on the legal
basis of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR (necessary for the performance of a contract) for processing carried out
on foot of the acceptance of the Terms of Service (and, for other separate processing, it would rely
on other legal bases).
3.38. In this regard, it claims that the processing is necessary for the performance of the contract with
the user and that the Privacy Policy further sets out, in more detail, the other legal bases that would
be relied on for other processing operations. WhatsApp rejects the idea that it sought to persuade
users that consent was the legal basis for all personal data processing. It further accordingly rejected
the Investigator’s analysis of whether valid consent was collected at the point of acceptance of the
Terms of Service, on the basis that WhatsApp never sought to rely on consent.
3.39. The Investigator analysed each of the arguments made in the original Complaint submitted. This
was, in my view, a sensible and correct approach. This was not an “own volition” Inquiry where the
Commission was entitled to scope matters of risk which it decided warranted investigation. While it
is normally the role of the Investigator to focus on the establishment of facts, to set out what elements
of the GDPR are engaged against those facts, to come to a view on whether there are likely
109

infringements identified which will then be the subject of further legal analysis and ultimately
decision-making by the Commission, this case is somewhat different.
3.40. The facts to be established are fairly limited and are largely relating to the wording of WhatsApp’s
Terms of Service and its Privacy Policy, and the design of its “User Engagement Flow” introduced in
April 2018 to guide users through the process of acceptance process. In fact, it appears to me that the
Investigator ended up devoting time responding to legal and theoretical assertions of the
Complainant’s representative, such as the argument that consent is a lex specialis and therefore the
mandatory legal basis where a contract primarily concerns personal data processing. Consequently,
the Final Inquiry Report contains more legal analysis and argument than might otherwise have been
the case (relative to a draft decision). I have considered all of the analysis of the Investigator carefully
and, in some instances, I adopt it and concur with it. In other instances I reject it, replace it, and explain
why.
3.41. Another feature of the Complaint is a section entitled “Applications”. In this section, the
Complainant requests an investigation of a very specific nature, and sets out the corrective powers
that the Complainant believes should be imposed i.e. an administrative fine and a prohibition on the
“relevant processing operations”. This section asks the Commission to:
“… fully investigates this complaint, by especially using its powers under Article 58(1)(a),
(e) and (f) of the GDPR, to particularly determine the following facts:
(i.) which processing operations the controller engages in, in relation to the personal data
of the data subject,
(ii.) for which purpose they are performed,
(iii.) on which legal basis for each specific processing operation the controller relies on and
(iv.) he/she additionally requests that a copy of any records of processing activities (Article
30 of the GDPR) are acquired.”
3.42. The right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority is governed by Article 77 GDPR. Article
77(1) states how a complaint may be made: “… every data subject shall have the right to lodge a
complaint with a supervisory authority…if the data subject considers that the processing of personal
data relating to him or her infringes this Regulation” [emphasis added]. Neither the request above,
nor a request to impose specified corrective powers, can be considered to constitute part of a
complaint made in accordance with Article 77(1) GDPR. The Complaint does not specify any
processing operations or any alleged infringements of the GDPR in the above request, but simply asks
the Commission to gather information on its behalf. Neither the GDPR nor the 2018 Act confer a
complainant with a particular right to make such a request, nor to specify what corrective powers
should be imposed in circumstances where the supervisory authority is of the view that an
infringement has occurred/is occurring. To the extent that such an approach might be known to
German law, I have already set out in detail why I do not accept that such law is applicable to the
exercise of my functions.
110

3.43. In those circumstances, it was for the Investigator, and ultimately for me as decision-maker, to
carry out an objective reading of the Complaint. In so doing, I must consider not only the content of
the Complaint, but also the legal framework by which the Commission is bound. It is also necessary
that an inquiry conducted on foot of a complaint must be feasible and workable. According to Article
77(1) GDPR, a complaint should relate to data processing that, in a complainant’s view, infringes the
GDPR. There is a lack of reasonable specificity in the above request in relation to processing operations
or alleged infringements.
3.44. Any request to investigate all processing, or hypothetical processing, particularly a request of
such an indefinite nature, does not, in my view, conform to the requirements of Article 77 GDPR. Such
a request does not specify any data processing or any alleged infringement, and would result in a
practically unworkable inquiry. Rather than being a complaint about specific processing operations,
the Complaint in this matter has, at times, strayed into the territory of instructing the Commission to
conduct an open-ended inquiry, and to direct that inquiry and the Commission’s resources in a
manner determined by the Complainant and/or the Complainant’s representative. It is instead for the
Commission to decide on the manner in which a reasonably specific Complaint is to be investigated.
3.45. The Decision therefore reflects the outcome of my determination on the matters relating to the
procedural and scope issues. It is important to again note that, as set out in paragraph 2.19 of this
Decision, the EDPB, in the Article 65 Decision, took a different view on the scope of the Complaint. In
the circumstances, the views expressed in this Schedule 1 must be read in conjunction with the
corresponding assessment and determination of the scope of the Complaint made by the EDPB in the
Article 65 Decision, as set out in Schedule 2 to this Decision.

111

SCHEDULE 2

112

